---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...

---
---


# 1. The Rise of the Network Commons

The Rise of the Network Commons returns to the topos of the wireless
commons on which I worked during the early 2000s. In this new version,
combining original research from my German book *Freie Netze*[^01chapter1_1] (2004)
and new research conducted in the context of the EU funded project
*Confine*[^01chapter1_2] (2012-2015), the exciting world of wireless community
network projects such as Guifi.net and Freifunk, Berlin, gets
interspersed with philosophical reflections on the relationship between
technology, art, politics, and history.

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="4.129166666666666in"
height="5.507638888888889in"}Fig. 1. Antenna installation at Haus des
Lehrers, 2003. Image courtesy Freifunk.

## 1.1 The World of Guifi.net and the Dispositif of Network Freedom

![](media/image2.jpeg){width="4.363888888888889in"
height="3.2729166666666667in"}Fig. 2. Guifi antenna.

On my recent visit to Barcelona in the context of the Confine project,
Guifi.net founder Ramon Roca took me to Gurb, the village he comes from.
There, in 2003 Guifi.net was started when Ramon realized that he would
never get good bandwidth at a fair price in this remote area in sight of
the foothills of the Pyrenees. Ramon, who is an IT professional but
keeps his working life and activities with Guifi.net separated, found
that he could get broadband by using WLAN to connect to a public
building in the outskirts of a nearby small town, Vic. Since then,
Guifi.net has grown to become the largest WLAN community network in
Europe, with currently more than 25,000 nodes. It is not entirely
correct anymore to call it a wireless community network since a growing
number of nodes are created by fibre-optic cable. Since Ramon and his
cooperators have found out how relatively easy it is to work with fibre,
he is on a new mission to get fibre to the curb to as many houses as
possible.

Visiting Gurb and talking to Ramon for nearly a full day has revitalized
my fascination for wireless (and wired) community networks. I have
written a book on wireless community networks in 2003, in German, under
the title *Freie Netze* (Free Networks).[^01chapter1_3] The choice of title back
then had deliberately emphasized the analogy between Free Networks and
Free Software. The title had been inspired by two very different
influences. On one hand there had been Volker Grassmuck’s early book
Freie Software.[^01chapter1_4] Volker’s magisterial work provided deep insight into
the history and politics of Free Software and stood out for me as an
example how a book on wireless community networks should be written. The
other inspiration had been provided by a sweeping lecture in Vienna in
June 2003 by Eben Moglen, lawyer of the Free Software foundation and
legal brain behind the licensing model of Free Software, the GNU General
Public License (GPL[^01chapter1_5]). Moglen’s thunderous and captivating speech had
presented the combination of Free Software, Free Hardware and Free
Networks like a kind of holy trinity of the everything-free-and-open
movement. Moglen’s conclusion was that while Free Software was already
an accomplished fact and free hardware was the hardest bit, free
networks were a viable possibility, yet there was still a long way to go
to attain critical mass.

My book had come maybe a few years too early. When it appeared, some of
the most important wireless community networks of today, such as
Freifunk, Berlin, Funkfeuer, Austria, or Guif.net, were either non
existent or existed in embryonic form only. The model of wireless
community networks on which my book had been based had been created by
Consume.net in the UK. Consume.net was the outcome of an improvised
workshop in December 1999 in Clink Street, near London’s creative net
art hub Backspace. I will describe the history of Consume in more detail
below, but one key aspect of that initiative was that it was launched by
non-techies. James Stevens, founder of Backspace, and Julian Priest,
artist-designer-entrepreneur, provided the impetus for DIY wireless
networking by sketching plans for a *Model 1* of WLAN-based community
networking on a napkin during a tempestuous train journey in late summer
1999. Their *Model 1* – a name chosen for its association with Henry
Ford’s first mass-produced car, the Ford Model 1 or Tin Lizzy – was a
techno-social network utopia.

The relatively young discipline of science studies teaches us that the
technical and the social cannot or should not be considered as
categorically separated. *‘*Technologies are socially produced’ is one
of the key phrases in the discourse of science studies. They do not
exist outside the human world but are the product of specific societies
which exist under specific conditions and circumstances. Technologies
are hybrids between nature and society, as science studies author Bruno
Latour puts it. Moreover, a specific school of science studies, the
Social Construction of Technological Systems (SCTS) has studied the
co-evolution of large technological systems and social structures. SCTS
pioneer Thomas P. Hughes, who studied the building of the first
nationwide electrical grid, has found that there are strong
co-dependencies between technological and social systems. While there is
undeniably a strong influence on the shaping of technologies exerted by
business interests, Hughes’ work emphasizes co-dependencies between
technologies and the people who build and maintain them, the
technologists or techies – a term I will use from now on because it
allows to refer to both academic computer scientists and researchers and
autodidactic hackers, whereby I hope my use of the term is not seen as
derisive in any way.

Engineers and skilled workers involved in large technological projects
bring certain predispositions to projects. As projects evolve, the
communities of techies develop certain habits and ways of working. The
technological and social system build a unity which determines the ways
how those technologies evolve in the future. What we can learn from
science studies is that neither is science objective (in the strict
sense of the word), nor is technology neutral. To believe the opposite
would either constitute scientific objectivism – a rather outdated form
of scientific positivism – or technological determinism, which is the
belief that technology alone is the main factor shaping social
developments.

James Stevens and Julian Priest, founders of Consume, are neither
scientific positivists nor technological determinists. They conceived
Model 1 as a techno-social system from the very start. Their ideas
combined aspects of social and technological self-organization. In
tech-speak, the network they aimed at instigating was supposed to become
a Wide Area Network (WAN). But while such large infrastructural projects
are usually either built by the state or by large corporations, James
and Julian thought that this could be achieved by bottom-up forms of
organic growth.

Individual node owners would set up wireless network nodes on rooftops,
balconies and window sills. Each node would be owned and maintained by
its owner, who would also define the rules of engagement with other
nodes. The network would grow as a result of the combination of social
and urban topologies. The properties of the technology – well strictly
speaking there is no such thing as property of technology as I just
explained but lets reduce complexity for a moment – impose certain
restrictions. WLAN (Wireless Local Area Networking), later called Wi-Fi
by the trademark of the Wi-Fi Alliance, operates in a part of the
electromagnetic spectrum that does not pass through obstacles such as
walls. Therefore, from one node to the next there needs to be an
uninterrupted line-of-sight. Node-owners need a way of identifying each
other in order to create a link. According to the properties of
internetworking protocols each of those links is a two-way connection,
which means that data can travel as easily in one direction as in the
other. Furthermore, node owners would agree to allow data to pass
through their nodes. There would not only be point-to-point connections
from one node to the other, but larger networks, where data can be sent
and received via several nodes. Such a wide area community network would
also have gateways to the internet in order to allow exchange of
information between the local wireless community network and the wider
networked world.

Those desired characteristics of Model 1 were not actually invented by
Julian and James. Those properties already existed, deep inside the
technologies we use to connect, but working for most parts unnoticed by
those who use them. The key term has already been introduced above,
without further explanation, it is the *protocols* that govern the flow
of information in networked communication structures. Protocols are
conventions worked out between techies to decide how the flow of data in
communication networks should best be organized. The basic protocols on
which the Net is running, such as the Internet Protocol (IP) and the
Transport Control Protocol (TCP) have been defined decades ago by
engineers and computer scientists working on the precursors of the Net,
Arpanet and NSF-net. Some people would go as far as saying that the
internet is neither the actual physical structure of cables and
satellites used to connect, nor the content that travels via such
structures but it is embodied in the suite of protocols, commonly
referred to as TCP/IP (those two are usually mentioned but there are
many more). The protocols are the essence of the Net because they give
it its key characteristics. I am not sure if this is not a very refined
form of technological determinism, but I would like to leave this
question open for a moment.

The reason for this hesitation is that the protocols are not identical
with the technology that uses them. The protocols are conventions that
can be described in textual form. The way how this is done is through so
called Requests for Comments (RFCs). Since the dawn of the Net, RFCs
have been defined in a way that runs counter to common understandings of
how technologies are created. RFCs are approved by techies who
congregate under the umbrella of the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). The arcane decision making mechanisms of the IETF have since the
very start been governed by maxims such as ‘rough consensus and running
code’. People who develop new internet technologies present them to
their peers who then react by making noises such as humming or
whistling. Criteria for approval are not theoretical consistency but
whether they actually do something or not. The robustness and the
freedom of the Net is guaranteed, despite the lack of central
coordination, by the self-organized decision making power of those
techies who meet at the IETF. While a lot of those people may have jobs
with large corporations, when they meet at IETF conferences they still
decide as technicians who adhere to their own codes of human
responsibility.

It is amazing because, despite the commercialization of the Net, this
has not fundamentally changed. Corporations and governments may seek to
wrest more and more control over the net, and while they are actually
quite successful in doing so in some areas, the social protocols of
decision making enshrined in the mores of the techno-social communities
have so far been able to withstand all such assaults. On the layer of
the protocols the Net was and is still *free*.

Thus, when James and Julian wrote out the formula of growth for Model 1,
they referred to a freedom to connect that is inherent to the way in
which the internet was originally conceived and still functions now, on
the layer of the protocols. The knowledge and awareness of that fact had
become buried by new layers built on top of older layers in the course
of technological improvement but also the commercialization of the Net
in the 1990s. Consume.net was started at the cusp of what was then
called the New Economy, a stock exchange boom fueled by the rise of
information and communication technologies in general and PCs and the
internet in particular. The 1990s had been a very exciting decade which
saw the rise from obscurity of the Net from a communication technology
used by scientists and a small number of civil society organizations,
artists and freaks in the late 1980s, early 1990s, to a widely used
medium driving and being driven by a gigantic economic machinery. In the
process, a lot of the properties that had been dear to the early
inhabitants of the Net, the digital natives, had become either sidelined
or overshadowed by commercially driven interest and the secret workings
of the deep state.

Model 1 was thus both a new techno-social invention but also a recurse
to the original Internet Arcadia. Against the tide of rising
commercialization and the inequalities and distortions that came with
it, wireless community networks were supposed to bring back a golden age
of networked communication, of equality and freedom. Technical and
social properties were conflated into a model of self-organization. The
possibility for that was provided by a small and often overlooked
feature of the technology. 802.11b was the technical name of the
wireless network protocol as used at about 1999. It allowed two
different operating modes, one where each wireless network node knew its
neighbors and could receive and send data based on fixed routing tables,
and another one, the ad-hoc mode, where nodes would spontaneously
connect with each other. The ad-hoc mode was supported by routing
protocols that are best suited for the wireless medium. In a fixed
network with cables, it is of advantage to work with fixed routing
protocols. When data arrives, the network node decides where to send it,
based on its knowledge of the topology of the network. But in wireless
networks that topology constantly changes. Nodes can break down due to
atmospheric or environmental influences. The quality of connection can
change dramatically because of disturbances in the electromagnetic
medium. Or a truck parks in front of your house and the line-of-sight is
suddenly gone.

For this reason, Consume.net started to get interested in a technology
called mesh networking. In the year 2000 mesh network protocols were
still very much in their infancy. There was a working group called
Mobile Ad-hoc Networking (Manet), supported by the US military. In
Germany, a small company was building something called MeshCube.[^01chapter1_6] It
was a working technology but it was not really open source and only the
developer knew how to run it. When Consume.net started to work with mesh
network technology, this seemed to be a utopian technology. While
neither James nor Julian were techies, they had the support of some very
skilled hackers, but neither of them was capable of significantly
developing mesh network protocols. Mesh networking was a dream,
something that was already on the horizon but not yet there.

This was a pattern established in 2000 and still very much in place in
the year 2014: when the problems of mesh networking would be solved,
wireless community networks would flourish and become unstoppable.
Social qualities, such as self-organization without centralized forms of
control, were mapped onto technological properties, such as the ability
of machines to automatically recognize each other and connect to build a
larger cloud of networked nodes. The idea of network freedom – the
ability to connect without having to apply to a central point of
governance and without having to go through a company such as a
telecommunications operator (telco) – was supposed to further
communication freedom and thus the rights and ability of people to
express themselves and communicate freely without top-down hierarchical
control. The convergence of those ideas I call the dispositif of mesh
networks and network freedom.

I am appropriating the term *dispositif* from Michel Foucault who used
it to ‘refer to the various institutional, physical, as well as
administrative mechanisms and knowledge structures which enhance and
maintain the exercise of power within the social body.’[^01chapter1_7]

Our mesh network dispositif does not (yet) add up to all society, but it
is something that is widely shared among techies building wireless
community networks. It is a discursive behavior, but also a set of
beliefs and a set of material assemblages. *Assemblage* is another term
that I appropriate freely from a French philosopher, Gilles Deleuze.
While the dispositif does not exist outside time, it is somehow hovering
above the concrete historical moment. In this way, the dispositif of
mesh networks has influenced wireless community networks since the year
2000. The assemblage, while also consisting of material and non-material
components, is concretely manifest in the historical moment. The mesh
network dispositif promises to bring about an era of unrestricted and
seamless communication, free from technological and social constraints.
This dispositif historically legitimates itself by the way the internet
was originally conceived. At the same time it contains the promise of a
future when the Net will be again what it once had been.

When I came to Barcelona in July 2014, I was thrilled to see that as
part of the EU funded research project Confine a project was under way
to develop the Quick Mesh Project (QMP). QMP is a so called free
firmware, a GNU/Linux based operating system for network devices. Many
people now have wireless routers at home. When you buy internet access
from a provider, you often also get a box that allows to wirelessly
connect to the Net. QMP would replace the operating system of such a
device with a much improved version, one that speaks the language of
mesh network protocols. To give a simple example, if in a street of
apartment blocks everybody who owns a wireless router replaces the
firmware with QMP and puts the router on the window sill, all those
machines would automatically connect and build a network without using
any cables or other hardware from commercial providers. It would make it
easy and simple to connect without having to go deep into system
settings. This has now changed from being a faraway utopian goal to
something that is literally around the corner.

It may or may not succeed. One problem with that is that it resembles
what Saskia Sassen described as an engineer’s utopia. Techies, whether
they are academically trained computer scientists, telecommunications
engineers or self-taught hackers, tend to believe in the unlimited
potential of technology. They see the potential of a technology. There
is nothing that speaks against it, on the contrary. It needs such people
who are capable of dreaming a different future based on creative bending
and twisting of technologies. The problem, however, is that far-sighted
techies tend towards a linear extrapolation of technologies into the
future without considering other factors, such as politics, the economy,
the fundamental differences between people in class-based societies and
so on and so forth. In this way, the highly productive mesh network
dispositif gets turned into the dreamworld of the internet cornucopia.
The technology gets imbued with characteristics that are actually
outside of it and depend on factors beyond the influence of creative
technologists. It becomes a messianic technology in the way the great
philosopher of culture and technology Walter Benjamin theorized it in
the 1930s.

## 1.2 Dawn of an Idea

![](media/image3.jpeg){width="4.580555555555556in"
height="3.473611111111111in"}Fig. 3. James Stevens with projection of
network topologies.

Good ideas often pop up at the same time at various points on the Earth,
they just seem to be in the air. And so it came that around the year
2000 at different points on the globe wireless free community networks
were started: Consume.net in London, New York Wireless, Seattle
Wireless, and Personal Telco, in Portland Oregon, were among the first
wireless community networks based on Wireless LAN, or WLAN. Nobody
really can say which one came first. I have been lucky to experience the
development of Consume and free2air.org in London from a close
encounter. Therefore, in this chapter I will tell the story of those
networks.

But before I go into the details of this story, it is worth remembering
a bit how things were back then. Today, when the debate shifts to a
topic such as so called digital natives, many young people seem
incapable of comprehending that there are middle-aged people like me who
have spent a large part of their adult life on-line. I had my first
computer in 1985, whereby I should say *we*, because it was a shared
computer between my then girlfriend and myself. In 1989 it was followed
by two new computers. She got an Amiga 2000, and I got a pre-Windows PC.
So I spent a good time learning key commands for the DOS version of
Word, while my partner could do wonderful graphical stuff on her Amiga.
We could even digitize video, change every single image and turn it into
a loop that could be played out and recorded to tape. While I was
envious of the slick graphical interface of the Amiga, my PC soon
learned a new skill, communication with other computers. That was when
the whole on-line fun started.

Actually, we had to overcome a few obstacles first. In Europe, computer
modems at the time – around the late 1980s to the early 1990s – had to
be licensed by the national postal, telegraph and telephone service
(PTT). This made the stuff prohibitively expensive for many. But we
found a workaround. We traveled to West-Berlin and there, in a store
called A-Z Electronics, we could buy a 2400 baud modem on the cheap.
This modem could be legally sold because it had one cable missing – a
loophole in German law according to which it was legal to sell
unlicensed equipment if it was not in a state to be used. After we
smuggled it back to Vienna, we soldered in the cable and connected the
modem to the phone line. Franz Xaver, a friend and artist-engineer, had
to help to solve issues with the arcane Austrian telephone system.
Another friend brought a pack of diskettes and we installed Telix, a
programme for communicating with bulletin board systems (BBS).

The BBS world was like a testing ground for virtual communities where
certain types of behavior could form. This could be elements of a
netiquette, but also an understanding of what it means to be on-line in
the first place. Stories about early on-line communities by authors such
as Sandy Stone[^01chapter1_8] and Howard Rheingold[^01chapter1_9] describe how these
communities, some of which go back to the early 1970s, foster social (or
anti-social ;-) behaviour.

First artistic experiments with *Art and Telecommunication*[^01chapter1_10] began
in the late 1970s. The Canadian artist Robert Adrian X, who by then was
living in Vienna, started an artist’s conference board called Artex on a
proprietary network in 1980. Fellow artist Roy Ascott described in vivid
terms how it felt to be on-line and engage in real-time synchronous
communication.

Over the past three years I have been interacting through my terminal
with artists in Australia, Europe, and North America, once or twice a
week through I.P. Sharp’s ARTBOX. I have not come down from that high
yet and frankly I don’t expect to. Logging in to the network, sharing
the exchange of ideas, propositions, visions and sheer gossip is
exhilarating. In fact it becomes totally compelling and addictive.[^01chapter1_11]

Similar feelings have been shared by almost everyone who experienced an
always-on network connection. But let us return to the BBS world, which
could be quite wild at times. Artists-hackers such as Toek from radio
art and performance group DFM circumvented the fact that those systems
did not really have graphical interfaces by creating a log-on page with
flashing and blinking ASCII animations. Communications in those systems
were uncensored – apart from the curiosity of the maintainer of the
system – and sometimes one could encounter, without looking for it,
cracked software or literature such as the *Hackerfibel* by the Chaos
Computer Club, or the Anarchist Hackers Cookbook, or The Temporary
Autonomous Zone by Hakim Bey; one could also find software for
war-dialing and similar things bordering on what was legally
permissible. This BBS content led to promote the myth that the internet
itself is a haven for radical illegal content with dark corners of
countless publicly available DIY bomb-building manuals.

This is a pretty persistent myth by the way, but has maybe more to do
with the criminalization of hacking by the US secret services who seemed
to be intent on demonizing an activity that many of those involved
understood primarily as curiosity, research, interest, gaining new
knowledge. When the internet was opened up for public usage, it seemed
to get populated very quickly by all kinds of creative spirits. In 1995,
when I had, through work, my first always on *broadband* internet, the
web seemed to consist primarily of artists, anarchists, trade unionists,
multinational and non governmental organizations, campaigners for the
environment, workers’ rights and indigenous groups, as well as the
occasional commercial web page of a forward looking company and the
standard setting physics department homepage which has been immortalized
by artist Olia Lialina with this work *Some Universe*[^01chapter1_12]. Olia Lialina
has also collected *Under Construction* signs such as this one, another
charming aspect of the early web:

![](media/image4.jpeg){width="1.5694444444444444in"
height="1.5694444444444444in"}Fig. 4. Animated GIF of computer user
banging head on keyboard.

While the on-line world was colorful and intellectually stimulating,
internet access was not that cheap at all at the time. We looked with
envy at the US, where local calls were almost free. In Europe you had
not only to pay the cost of a provider, but also the cost of the call
for every minute you spent on-line. As the 1990s progressed, the modems
got faster and maybe telephone provider rates a bit cheaper, but the
situation remained fundamentally the same, except in those rare
instances, where people came up with inventive solutions.

## 1.3 Cheap Broadband for the Masses: Vienna Backbone Service

In Vienna, Austria, the media artist Oskar Obereder started an internet
service provider almost by accident. With some art school friends,
Obereder had launched *A Thousand Master Works*, a project where artists
produced multiples which were sold via a poster. Soon, the poster proved
an inefficient method of keeping the offerings up to date. Obereder
created a data base and together with some other artists, hackers, and
the editors of music magazine Skug brought the server on-line, as a web
based ordering system. The same technology also supported Skug’s data
base of independent music. This machine had to be online 24/7, so
Obereder and Skug had to get a leased line. In order to share the cost,
they distributed internet access throughout the loft-spaces in a former
furniture factory where lots of other artists and creative people
worked. Everyone who connected to this cable-bound ad-hoc net got the
buzz of an always-on internet and Obereder inadvertently became a
provider.

Working together with a small ISP, AT.net, Obereder and colleagues found
out about a technology that was coming from California, brand new, and
allowed normal copper telephone lines to be used for broadband internet
connections. This was called DSL, and when they first contacted the
manufacturer they told them to get lost, because they only sold to
telecom providers. Finally, the Austrians got hold of a few modems and
started laying the groundwork for what would become Vienna Backbone
Service (VBS). This network was offered by three small ISPs as a
cooperative effort, but it was also *provided* by many of its first
customers who were hosting network exchange services in their cupboards.

Because of the *creative milieu*[^01chapter1_13] in which Obereder existed, he knew
many artists and techies or combinations of those, who had high
bandwidth needs and some technical skills. As he by now had founded a
company, called Silverserver – later shortened to Sil – they had found
out that there was a special type of telephone line that you could rent
quite cheaply from the incumbent and over which you could run DSL.
Moreover, the cost was dependent on the distance from the next exchange.
Silverserver started finding friends, who were also customers, who lived
next to an exchange. In this way, they found a foothold in many Viennese
districts, from where they could spread out organically, offering
always-on broadband, initially at a tenth of the price of the incumbent.

In 1998 the workshop and conference *Art Servers Unlimited* brought
together about 40 artists, hackers, and activists of all kinds at
London’s Backspace and the ICA. Obereder was presenting the model of VBS
and James Stevens caught an earful of it. What he mainly got out of it
was that you could grow a rather large network in a decentralized way,
by a cooperative method that involved people taking over responsibility
for a node.

## 1.4 Consume – the Culture of Free Networks

![](media/image5.jpeg){width="5.963888888888889in"
height="3.9756944444444446in"}Fig. 5. Free Networking as social
mechanism: Consume workshop with Manu Luksch, Ilze Black and Alexei
Blinov, circa 2003.

James Stevens and Julian Priest found another inspiration for their
*Model 1* (see chapter 1.1) through the way in which in a particular
neighborhood and social environment WLAN was used to share a leased line
internet connection. At the turn of the millennium, James Stevens and
Julian Priest had ‘worked for a decade almost in multimedia, making CD
ROMs and websites, running around… then we decided to give it a try and
concentrate on doing more altruistic work.’[^01chapter1_14]

Both had their offices in a special corner of Southwark, the London
borough just south of the Thames, in Clink Street, in a small warehouse,
directly on the riverside, called Winchester Wharf. Today, oh irony, the
ground floor is occupied by a Starbucks. Adjacent to it there were other
warehouses, converted into offices and studios for various creative
outfits, from record labels to web and multimedia companies. In
Winchester Wharf, the web company Obsolete and the internet cafe
Backspace enjoyed a few years of happy coexistence. Obsolete had become
successful quickly by making web-pages for Ninja Tune and other record
labels located in the same building. After record companies followed
some blue chip companies such as Levi’s who were intent on having a
cool, young image. But James Stevens had already opted out at that time.

So he founded Backspace,[^01chapter1_15] a place at the ground floor, with one
window almost on water-level when the tide was high. Fittingly, the
homepage of Backspace showed (and still does show) a graphical animation
of the river Thames with the web-sites hosted by Backspace floating like
half submerged buoys in the river. Descriptions of Backspace as an
internet cafe or gallery just show the ineptitude of common language to
describe what it was. It was a hub where people with all kinds of ideas
– whether they were related to the internet or not – came together to
talk, organize, share. Backspace was a crucible of London’s net art and
digerati, where events such as the legendary *Anti with E*[^01chapter1_16]
conferences and lectures took place. Backspace also became quickly known
for its regular live-streaming sessions, at first mainly radio, later
also videos, with Captain Gio D’Angelo often in command.[^01chapter1_17]

That was only made possible, because Backspace shared a leased line with
Obsolete, who were just upstairs. The other small outfits in the area,
on the same street but not in the same building, also wanted a share in
the bandwidth bonanza. At first some sort of grey-area solution was
considered, like finding a way of connecting buildings via Ethernet, but
that turned out to be impossible, unless one dug up the street, legally,
as a provider company or one broke the law. At some point, someone must
have stumbled over Wi-Fi or AirPort, as the version promoted by Apple
was called. A lot of people in Clink Street were designers and thus
Apple users. Apple at the time was the first major consumer computer
company which supported Wi-Fi through their so-called *Airport* access
point together with early integration of Wi-Fi interfaces into their
consumer computer products.[^01chapter1_18]

The creative cluster of artists, designers, musicians, and entrepreneurs
experienced the benefits of broadband and also the laws of network
distribution. As Stevens and Priest noted, the maximum bandwidth
available is only relevant at peak times, when everybody was on-line,
checking into the system, or after work, when people played games or
watched videos. Otherwise, the 512K connection, which today would not be
considered broadband anymore, was giving everyone enough space to live,
listen to music, build web-pages or even play on-line games. But the
bandwidth paradise on the Southern shore of the Thames was not to last.

Winchester Wharf was sold as part of a general regeneration drive of the
Southern river bank, at a time when Tate Modern was opened and the whole
area underwent a wider transformation. ‘Between us, we both had an axe
to grind when Backspace was closed, we sat together and talked about it
and thought it was a good moment to put into practice some of the ideas
that we have hatched and some of the things that we have experimented
with’, remembered James in 2003. In late 1999, they organized a first
workshop to start building Consume, in the offices of I/O/D, one of a
web of companies and art groups in the area. For James Stevens, it was
from the beginning a *social thing*. ‘The idea that came out was much
more straight forward than it looks now, but it was interlinking
locations where people work and live using this wireless stuff. We did
it already across the street, so that sort of scale where we had a
grasp.’ (James Stevens, interview

with the author, 2003).

![](media/image6.jpeg){width="6.153472222222222in"
height="4.102083333333334in"}Fig. 6. Consume workshop at the studio of
AmbientTV.NET, London, circa 2003.

I received an invitation to this workshop and remember that I was
electrified (although it turned out that I could not participate in that
first meeting). I knew that James Stevens was on to something. As he
later put it in his own words, ‘it was on the cusp of a wave of
awareness that was sweeping around, also economically we were in a funny
state, in a kind of decline of the swell after all of that gluttony of
that Dotcom shit.’ Within the space of a few years the Net had been
completely transformed from a colorful space dominated by various
leftist and creative types to a place apparently ruled and defined by
multinational corporations.

The early WWW had generated a lot of enthusiasm about free speech and
possibilities of political self-organization. It was seen as an
electronic Agora, a place where democracy could be reinvented through
participatory processes, electronically mediated. Yet in the eyes of the
media, all attention was devoted to internet startups such as Netscape
and Amazon who made billions with their IPOs. Ideas about freedom of
speech and creative expression, held dear at places such as Backspace,
were completely omitted in public discourse. But in late 1999 the stock
market boom had started to flounder and in April 2000 the Nasdaq
collapsed. Suddenly, the pendulum swung back and ideas about freedom of
speech and political self-organization came back. The call for the first
Consume workshop was met with *a phenomenal response* according to
Stevens. The question they asked themselves was: the technology had
shown to work in a relatively confined area. Could it be made to work
over a mile or two? Could different areas be connected into a Wide Area
Community Network? Stevens:

There was a momentum there, in that way, because it grasped peoples
attention and got them to come out, literally, just physically to turn
up, gather at a meeting, and really, the second meeting that we had, we
built nodes. It was really just like as direct as that: physically turn
up and do it; those who could handle the Unix side of it, which is not
everybody, obviously.[^01chapter1_19]

A subsequent workshop was held sometime in the first half of 2000. What
they were out to do, ‘was to provide ownership of network segments to
self-provide those services and in addition to that do all sorts of
node-to-node kind of benefits’, explained Stevens. But the dynamic IP
packet routing required (or meshing) was soon confirmed as a core issue
remaining to be solved. The nodes deployed in such a network had to
mesh, and this had to be automatic.

This was a grave problem in 2000, since the internet by then had been
thoroughly commodified and chunks of it handed over to companies, who
could define it as their *country* or Autonomous System, controlling the
entry points of their network. This is called Border Gateway Routing
Protocol and on such a technical level there is nothing to be said
against it. However, it introduces a more distributed hierarchical
structure, which helped accommodate rapid connectivity growth of
internet networks. A downside of this growth appeared soon after with
increasing scarcity for assignment of remaining globally routable IP
network numbers. Due to the cascaded nature of networks, with many
layers, users in internal networks are often linked via a protocol
called NAT (Network Address Translation). That means, that the router
controls the global connection to the world, while any node behind it is
visible to the world through this gateway alone. In other words, there
is no publicly visible route to one’s machine. If a lot of people who
share their network connectivity via wireless have such a provider, the
routing in the network becomes a problem. There are workarounds for that
problem, but this is just one aspect of a protracted sequence of issues
regarding wireless routing.[^01chapter1_20]

At that point, in the year 2000, mesh networking technology was really
in its infancy. Through the launch of Consume, a lot of gifted people
started to get interested in mesh networking and similar ideas. It is
fair to say that community networks took mesh technology out of the
military closet and turned it into a working technology (a story which
continues today with great intensity and to which I will return later in
this book).

The way Consume grew, initially, owed much more to the special *genius*
of James Stevens than to any technology. *Genius*, a term usually
reserved for artists or sometimes also scientists, in this context
refers to a social skill. James Stevens has a special way of *growing*
projects, of initiating them, bringing them into existence but then
letting them go their own way. Rather than becoming the leader and
figurehead, he tries to initiate a self-perpetuating idea. Maybe this
has also something to do with his past in the underground music and
squatter scene in the 1980s. Politically, those social scenes were, if
not explicitly anarchist, connected with a deep-seated social and
artistic liberalism that I found to be much more entrenched in England
than in any other country of which I know.

For Stevens and Priest it was a long term goal to ‘find an opportunity,
within the legislation of radio spectrum, to use these domestic computer
devices to interlink in a way that it was deemed possible to bypass the
local loop’, argued Stevens. For him, what became a priority was
advocacy, ‘promotion of systems that create a mesh over the topography.
\[…\] You just have to propagate the idea or possibility or potential
across the landscape.’ And that is what happened in the years 2000 to
2002. While Julian Priest had to take a step back for a little while for
private reasons and because of moving to Denmark, James Stevens and a
small but fast growing group of volunteers was building Consume, a
self-propagating net. A Consume mailing list and a website were
launched. But the main mechanism for propagating the idea were
workshops. There were a number of workshops in spring and summer of
2002, one at the studio of Manu Luksch and Ilze Black, another one at
Limehouse Town Hall, which I remember vividly.

The workshops offered something for everyone. First and foremost, they
gave people in a particular area the opportunity to meet and discuss the
possibilities of creating a local wireless community network. This
involved the social side of getting to know other people in the area.
This may not sound like much, but in London talking to neighbors is seen
as something quite radical. The only apparently banal thing of *talking
to neighbors* went together with exploring the city-scape for suitable
locations for antennas and repeaters.

Those who were inclined to do so were building antennas, an activity
that showed to be quite attractive for a diverse range of people. It is
also something that turns the rather abstract idea of the network into
something that can be literally grasped. Antenna building also involves
learning about basic physics and the electromagnetic spectrum, which is
something very useful in a world pervaded by electronic devices.

Other workshop participants turned to the software side of things. At
the time, old computers were used as wireless routers. They were taken
apart, reassembled, equipped with network cards, turned into GNU/Linux
machines and then configured by usage of some bespoke experimental
routing software. The issues that posed themselves with regard to
routing and networking were publicly and hotly debated which, in my
case, triggered a steep learning curve. This was a time when I started
to gain knowledge of IP numbers, address spaces, NATing, and port
forwarding, and, last not least, routing protocols.

![](media/image7.jpeg){width="4.853472222222222in"
height="3.7784722222222222in"}Fig. 7. Screenshot of Consume Node Data
Base of UK in text mode.

As Stevens and a core group of supporters traveled up and down the
country, workshopping, talking, advocating, Consume quickly developed a
national dimension. Networks and nodes popped up all over the country.
The vibrancy of Consume was based on the support it found by a wide
range of people across the UK. Stevens advocated a model of
decentralized person to person communication, realized via self-managed
nodes. Decentralization was at the core of the idea, politically as well
as technologically. The network was not centrally owned and managed but
came together as a result of the activities of many independent and
self-motivated actors. James Stevens at the time argued:

Creating any sort of infrastructural layer on the landscape, in an
environment or the community, that’s something that has always been left
to the councils or commercial entities, but this is something that can
be pulled out from the ground at any level almost really. A school can
just decide to put up an access point: utilize, redistribute, in order
to legitimately pass the network that it has got from its council
network and say its available throughout the school without any
wires.[^01chapter1_21]

Stevens wanted to demonstrate that large, infrastructural projects could
be realized in a bottom-up manner, through processes of
self-organization and through the mobilization of social capital (rather
than financial capital). This was only possible because Consume
attracted some very gifted people, such as the Russian artist-engineer
Alexei Blinov, founder of Raylab, later Hive Networks;
hacker-programmer-techies such as Jasper, who programmed the Consume
Node data base, and BSD core developer Bruce Simpson; and network admin
wizards such as Ten Yen and Ian Morrison. Other people who participated,
such as Saul Albert and Simon Worthington, co-founder of Mute Magazine,
could be described as non-commercial social entrepreneurs; their
strength was also advocacy, creating ideas of their own and pulling in
people and resources; the same can be said of artists and curators such
as Manu Luksch, Ilze Black and myself who, for a while, also belonged to
the core of the London free network scene.[^01chapter1_22] Another core participant
was Adam Burns, who can claim to have had the same idea, more or less,
by himself, and had set up the first wireless free network node in
Europe, free2air.org.

## 1.5 You are Free 2 Air Your Opinion

![](media/image8.jpeg){width="6.334027777777778in"
height="4.222916666666666in"}Fig. 8. Adam Burns and Manu Luksch explore
skies over East London. Photo: Chris Helgren.

While Consume had been an early project, as a really existing free
network in London it had been preceded by free2air.org. Free2air.org was
the virtual flag flown by Adam Burns, of Australian descent. In his
daytime job he managed firewalls of financial groups, in his spare time
he had set up an omni-directional antenna on a building on Hackney Road,
just above the Bus stop and a Halal Chicken shop. From there, everybody
could pick up a signal who was within range.

To my knowledge I am not aware of any other facility in Europe offering
totally open network access like this. I do not want to know the name,
the address, the credit card number, the color of the eyes or hair of
anyone who connects through to this network. That’s unimportant to me,
and I don’t feel that this is a necessary requirement.[^01chapter1_23]

At the time of the interview, in autumn 2002, Adam Burns claimed that
free2air had been active for 18 months. Thus, from late 1999 or early
2000, free2air.org, hosted on a machine called Ground Zero, offered free
wireless internet access to everyone passing through. Adam Burns had
been involved with early ISPs in Australia in the early 1990s, providing
internet access more out of ethical conviction than business sense. This
background has inspired his keen sense of networking as a social
project.

free2air is a contentious name, but one that I have chosen to use.
Basically it has a dual meaning: once you establish such a network the
cost of information travel is free. It’s not a totally free service to
establish, you need to buy hardware, you need computer expertise and so
on. But the whole idea of ongoing costs are minimal. Secondly, what I
liked about it is the plans for a distributed open public access
network. It gets rid of the idea of a central ISP, in other words,
globally around the world, when we are talking about the internet rather
than censorship or pedophiles hanging out, or bomb makers, there is a
lot of concentration on what really goes on in networks. When you have
got a lot of people passing information directly to each other its very
hard to track down what information has and has not passed and how it
got aired. So there is a double meaning to free2air, it also means you
are free to air your expressions without concern or problems in getting
that message through.[^01chapter1_24]

## 1.6 East End Net

![](media/image9.jpeg){width="5.590277777777778in"
height="4.192361111111111in"}Fig. 9. Free2air's node groundzero gets an
antenna upgrade circa 2002.

Adam Burns became a central person in the London wireless scene around
Consume and what came to be known as East End Net. The idea was launched
to connect Limehouse Town Hall with the area around the office of Mute
magazine at lower Brick Lane, and somehow to connect also Bethnal Green
and central Hackney. That bit was also the place where I lived at the
time. While the large version of East End Net never materialized, we had
our local version of it, with a connection from free2air.org to the
*compound*, a large workspace building for small industries at the
bottom of Broadway Market in E8.

![](media/image10.jpeg){width="5.74375in"
height="4.307638888888889in"}Fig. 10. East End Net: The Original Map.

With AmbientTV.net’s help, the connection was spread by wireless and
wirebound throughout the building. For several years a community of
changing size, from between 20 to 40 or 60 people, inhabited a chunk of
the net. Due to the social composition of this area, a number of art
projects using the free WLAN took place. I will turn to those projects
at a later stage.

While East End Net was never built in the way it was supposed to, the
discussions and the focus that it generated was highly productive in a
number of areas. Several lines of flight are taking off from this point,
which all will have to be followed separately – so I will just hint at
some of those ideas in overview form. The hand drawn original map of
East End Net was the starting point for a lot of ideas about mapping of
wireless networks, but also ideas about communal map making as such. It
was the time when the Open Street Map project began, as it was
recognized that also something as complex as a map could be built in a
decentralized way by unpaid volunteers.

Consume’s NodeDB, as already mentioned, was a quite early and successful
attempt at building a website that facilitates registering a free
network node through a wiki-like functionality. The idea was that the
database would not only contain technical information about nodes, but
also additional information about services offered. In this way, the
NOdeDB would become the focus of community development and of
micro-ecologies of small business, art, culture, activism.

The communal building of a wireless mesh network over a large part of a
metropolitan area also raised issues about ownership and responsibility.
While, as we shall see, in Germany the discussion from the very start
was dominated by anxiety about legal repercussions of sharing an
internet connection, in London the discussion was about the notion of
the commons. It was through Julian Priest that I became introduced to
the work of Elinor Ostrom who successfully contested the hegemony of the
thesis of the Tragedy of the Commons – work for which she later received
the Nobel price in economics. We started to discuss the implications of
what it means to treat the network as a commons and sought to find ways
of affirming this status of the network commons.

For me, personally, two fundamental insights emerged from my involvement
at the time. Through participating in workshops and talking to techies,
I started to understand a bit more what happened behind the surface of
the screen when one clicks on a webpage or sends an email. As I gained
insight into how networks function technically, I experienced this as a
form of empowerment. In my view, everyone should understand at least a
little bit how networks work. Why? Because networking is not just about
moving around bits and bytes, it is about communication, freedom of
speech, about democratic participation, the freedom to learn things. One
big problem that we have in societies such as ours is that the division
of labor imposed on us creates categorical separations between things
that should be seen and understood as belonging together. Building and
maintaining telecommunication networks is seen as a technical task but
affects fundamental human rights and social issues. Thus, everybody
should have at least some idea about how it works, as one otherwise
cannot meaningfully participate in Network Society.

Thus, as a grand thesis I would like to introduce here, I propose that
the involvement of ordinary people in building a network commons has a
profound emancipatory effect. In particular, as the process allows
people to learn more about the structure and the functioning of the
internet, they gain a better understanding of what they can potentially
achieve in societies and, no less important, how to protect themselves
from the harmful effects of information abuse by corporations and
government. As people learn how networks work they can become teachers
of the free network spirit. They will understand that they can become
part of the network (and not only be users of a service provided by a
corporation or the state) and can bring to it their own specializations
and ideas. Through that, the idea of the network also gets enriched.

Thus, the second part of the thesis is that free networks contribute to
the democratization of technology. Conventionally, technology is
considered to be developed behind the closed walls of research labs.
There, gods in white (or jeans and black polo-neck sweater) develop the
technologies of the futures, which the thankful people then consume as a
commodity. The way in which wireless community networks function, that
is, the development of cutting edge technology, is opened up to wider
mechanisms of participation. This second part of the thesis is almost
confirmed already through the existence of projects such as the EU
project Confine. Through the involvement of community networkers in
shaping future technologies, those technologies become less elitist,
less controlled by narrow commercial or security interest. The original
peer-to-peer spirit of the Net gets enhanced and made fit for the future
in a network commons that is there to protect our democratic freedoms
and rights.[^01chapter1_25]

[^01chapter1_1]: Armin Medosch, Freie Netze. Geschichte, Politik und Kultur offener
    WLAN-Netze, Heise Verlag, Hannover 2004,
    https://ftp.heise.de/tp/buch\_11.pdf.

[^01chapter1_2]: Confine Project (2012-2015), archived October 2015,
    https://web.archive.org/web/20151003180403/https://www.confine-project.eu/.

[^01chapter1_3]: Armin Medosch, Freie Netze. Geschichte, Politik und Kultur offener
    WLAN-Netze, Heise Verlag, Hannover 2004,
    https://ftp.heise.de/tp/buch\_11.pdf.

[^01chapter1_4]: Volker Grassmuck, Freie Software. Zwischen Privat- und
    Gemeineigentum, Bundeszentrale für politische Bildung, 2. Auflage
    2004, https://freie-software.bpb.de/Grassmuck.pdf.

[^01chapter1_5]: GNU General Public License (GPL),
    https://www.gnu.org/licenses/licenses.html.

[^01chapter1_6]: OpenWrt: 4G Systems MTX-1 MeshCube / AccessCube,
    https://openwrt.org/toh/4g.systems/access.cube.

[^01chapter1_7]: Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dispositif. The same
    Wikipedia page further defines the dispositif as ‘the interaction of
    discursive behavior (i. e. speech and thoughts based upon a shared
    knowledge pool), non-discursive behavior (i. e. acts based upon
    knowledge), and manifestations of knowledge by means of acts or
    behaviors \[...\]. Dispositifs can thus be imagined as a kind of
    Gesamtkunstwerk, the complexly interwoven and integrated dispositifs
    add up in their entirety to a dispositif of all society.’ (quoted
    from Siegfried Jäger: Theoretische und methodische Aspekte einer
    Kritischen Diskurs- und Dispositivanalyse
    http://www.diss-duisburg.de/Internetbibliothek/Artikel/Aspekte\_einer\_Kritischen\_Diskursanalyse.htm).

[^01chapter1_8]: Allucquère Rosanne Stone, *The War of Desire and Technology at the
    Close of the Mechanical Age*. MIT Press, 1996.

[^01chapter1_9]: Howard Rheingold, *The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the
    Electronic Frontie*r. MIT Press, 1993.

[^01chapter1_10]: Heidi Grundmann, *Art Telecommunication*. Vancouver, B.C.:
    Western Front Publication, 1984.

[^01chapter1_11]: Roy Ascot 1984, quoted in Grundmann 1984, p. 28.

[^01chapter1_12]: Olia Lialina, *Some Universe*,
    [http://art.teleportacia.org/exhibition/stellastar/](https://web.archive.org/web/20150520012157/http://art.teleportacia.org/exhibition/stellastar/).

[^01chapter1_13]: I have written more extensively about this in Medosch, Armin.
    *Kreative Milieus*. In *Vergessene Zukunft: Radikale Netzkulturen in
    Europa*, 1. Aufl., pp. 19–26. Bielefeld: Transcript, 2012.

[^01chapter1_14]: James Stevens, interview with the author, June 2003, private
    notes.

[^01chapter1_15]: Backspace, http://bak.spc.org/.

[^01chapter1_16]: *Anti with E* conferences and lectures,
    http://www.irational.org/cybercafe/backspace/.

[^01chapter1_17]: See article by Josephine Berry, Captain's Mate D'Angelo In
    Interview with intergalactic hack Josephine Berry aboard Starship
    Backspace, 07 August 1998, archived July 2003,
    https://web.archive.org/web/20030704110709/http://www.medialounge.net/lounge/workspace/crashhtml/cc/23.htm.

[^01chapter1_18]: See History of Wi-Fi: Wolter Lemstra, Vic Hayes and John
    Groenewegen, The Innovation Journey of Wi-Fi: The Road to Global
    Success. Cambridge University Press, 2010.

[^01chapter1_19]: James Stevens, interview with the author, June 2003, private
    notes.

[^01chapter1_20]: Corinna Elektra Aichele, a free networker from Berlin, has summed
    up those problems and possible solutions much better than I ever
    could in her book *Mesh – Drahtlose Ad-hoc Netze*, Open Source
    Verlag, 2007,
    https://download-master.berlin.freifunk.net/ebooks/mesh\_kapitel4\_leseprobe.pdf.

[^01chapter1_21]: James Stevens, interview with the author, June 2003, private
    notes.

[^01chapter1_22]: Here, the original text said: “(I will dedicate a special chapter
    to art and wireless community networks later in this book)”, which
    might have been a note of the author to himself that ended up
    unrealized.

[^01chapter1_23]: Adam Burns, Interview with Armin Medosch, 2002.

[^01chapter1_24]: Adam Burns, Interview with Armin Medosch, 2002.

[^01chapter1_25]: Related links:

    Guifi: https://guifi.net/

    Freifunk: https://freifunk.net/

    Confine Project (2012-2015), archived October 2015,
    https://web.archive.org/web/20151003180403/https://www.confine-project.eu/.

    Art Servers Unlimited: https://monoskop.org/Art\_Servers\_Unlimited.
