---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...

---
---


# 5. Free Networks: We Are Only Just Beginning

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="4.722222222222222in"
height="3.5416666666666665in"}Fig. 22 Gio and Alexi in the Wireless
Spring.

We are only just beginning, is the message I have picked up from the two
biggest communities in Europe, from Guifi.net and from Freifunk. Since
the publication of the first chapter and this one, Guifi.net has grown
from approximately 25,000 to 26,500 nodes. Similarly, the political
implications of the free network movement have become more easily
visible today. As Jürgen Neumann and Monic Meisel report, Freifunk has
*unfortunately* benefited massively from the Snowden allegations. Since
it has become known how massive the surveillance machinery is,
self-managed networks suddenly make much more sense again. While many
things have been coming together to make Freifunk possible, one thing
was less in their favor, the German legal climate. Freifunk finds itself
at the center of a prolonged battle about *Störerhaftung*.

In Germany, from the very start I was asked by potential node owners, if
they would not get themselves into trouble by offering an unprotected
WLAN access. In Germany, there was and is a big worry about so called
Störerhaftung – liability for violations of laws by users of an open
WLAN access point. In Germany, cases of legal precedence have been
created, where owners of WLAN routers were held responsible for
violations of law by people who had logged on to their access point and
used it, for instance, for file sharing of copyright-protected music and
films. Such cases, however, have been relatively rare. The real problem
is that in Germany, there exist specialized law firms who have made it
their business model to send threatening letters to people whom they
accuse of a violation. While often there is hardly any evidence, and the
intention of those law firms is not to take those cases actually to
court, they offer people an easy way out by paying a certain sum for an
out-of-court settlement. People unaware of their legal rights and maybe
scared of entering a prolonged legal battle with an opponent they
consider superior, give in and pay. This is a real nuisance and has
created a situation of insecurity for participants in Freifunk. However,
this is not the only threat to network freedom in Germany. There are
genuine cases, where court cases have been brought by content providers
and copyright owners who think their copyright has been infringed.

Freifunk has been battling those problems for a long time and has come
up with some creative solutions. One is to build locally a community
association which can then obtain the same status as a provider. While
this solves the *Störerhaftung* problem it may create new ones such as
costly legal obligations for data warehousing. So Freifunk in
cooperation with the OpenWRT-Team released the first hundred
*Freifunk-Freedom-Fighter-Boxes* – wireless routers flashed with an
OpenWRT release configured to route all data via a virtual private
network (VPN) through an ISP in Sweden, so that German law does not
apply.

![](media/image2.jpeg){width="4.6194444444444445in"
height="2.5631944444444446in"}Fig. 23. Freifunk Freedom Box on
Mainstream TV.

This action, launched in 2012 under the title *Freifunk statt Angst*
(Free radio instead of fear)[^05chapter5_1]\
created plenty of publicity. In an initial action, Freifunk gave away
one hundred Freifunk Freedom Fighter Boxes. When users logged on to such
a router, they got a Splash page which informed them about the political
background.[^05chapter5_2] According to Jürgen Neumann, one of the founders of
Freifunk, the action had always meant to be a temporary publicity stunt.
However, the battle against *Störerhaftung* in Germany turned out to be
quite a protracted one. And for many people it offered a relatively safe
option.

At the same time, the Freifunk Freedom Fighter box was just one step of
a larger counter-offensive on many layers. At the time of writing, in
November 2014, there were several court cases going on concurrently. As
Monic Meisel reported on 27 November 2014, one group of lawsuits had
been stopped because the claimant had withdrawn all allegations. They
obviously accepted that the accused was a member of Freifunk and that
because of its quasi provider-like status there was no liability.[^05chapter5_3] At
the same time, the public climate also changed. In an article, Prof.
Thomas Hoeren[^05chapter5_4] reports that a number of court decisions had gone
against *Störerhaftung*. Thomas Hoeren is a leading internet law expert
in Germany and specialized in issues where technology and restrictions
on it infringe on people’s civil liberties. According to Hoeren, the
liability of node owners is not a foregone conclusion.

Störerhaftung has meanwhile become recognized as an impediment to the
development of a creative information society in Germany. The number of
open WLAN hotspots in proportion to the number of citizens in Germany is
very low. As I can confirm as a frequent traveller, in many countries
around the world, finding an open WLAN hotspot is quite easy, but not so
in rich and bandwidth saturated Germany. German media, such as *Heute*,
the news programme of public national television, have started to
recognize that *Störerhaftung* is one of the main reasons why there are
so few open WLAN hotspots in German cities, towns and villages.[^05chapter5_5] The
German coalition government has announced in its coalition agreement to
enable open WLAN hotspots in German cities. A number of cities such as
Hamburg now also want to realize this. But until *Störerhaftung* is
revoked, there will be legal insecurity. A new draft law has been
created which, it is claimed will provide legal security for node
owners. But the devil is in the detail and this law is so badly drafted
that it actually could achieve the opposite, argues Prof. Hoeren.[^05chapter5_6]

Freifunk has started a campaign in 2014, which has intensified in 2015,
asking its members to write to their MPs to not vote in favor of this
law and demand significant changes.[^05chapter5_7] Up until March 2015, more than
200 MPs received letters informing them about inefficiencies of this
draft law. In my view, these are good steps but need to be intensified.

Wireless community networks are growing up, they are getting a political
voice. In such cases the technology itself is not the center of
attention but serves as a catalyst to ferment wider political action.
The issues and hurdles posed to wireless community networking turn
activists into educators of the public. Together with other activists
working against surveillance and for open data, their activities raise
issues that make the network more transparent for citizens. We can thus
see different layers of being political.

On the most basic layer, material access is political, because there are
situations and places where the availability of free or cheap broadband
is an issue. We are reaching a point where not having internet seriously
disadvantages you – you cannot fully participate in society. Freifunk
Hamburg, for instance, in this podcast[^05chapter5_8] tells about a refugee camp on
the premises of St. Pauli church, where Freifunk Hamburg established a
free hot-spot, without mightily banging its drum about it. Freifunk is
now working with refugees in several cities, providing them with free
internet, without advertising this too loudly, because of the many
discriminations refugees face (not just in Germany).

While access to the network is one layer on which freedom can be
formulated, another layer is the actual shape of the network. In the
early 2000s, when free network movements started, broadband via ADSL and
cable often came with restrictions, such as no fixed IP numbers and an
automatic reset of the network connection once every 24 hours, as well
as imbalance between upload and download speed. The actual shape of the
network connection, its technical properties, also define how *free* a
network is. This affects deep layers of network technology, where access
points / providers have powers to filter and monitor traffic. Wireless
community networks thus have an important function in educating the
public but also politicians about the social necessity of net
neutrality.

Finally, also on the layer of applications and content, networks can be
more or less free. Here, one of the major sources of insecurity arises
through issues such as copyright, or more generally speaking,
intellectual property. In countries with a repressive regime, freedom of
speech and other issues are also at stake. In my 2004 book *Freie
Netze*[^05chapter5_9] I tried to systematize those ideas by creating a layered
model of network freedom. If demand arises, maybe I will translate and
update this model.

In the meantime, however, since I wrote that earlier book, a major
economic crisis has happened. Free network activists often appeared to
rather robot-like repeat Richard Stallman’s dictum that the *free* in
*free software* is not about free beer, but about free speech. Well,
maybe this opinion turns out, if applied to networks, to be narrow and
dogmatic. Free or at least cheap telecommunication is an important issue
of our times. Especially after the outbreak of an economic crisis, even
in the richest countries, there is a digital divide, as some groups or
strata of society tend to have no internet or also no PCs. Such issues
are often connected with intractable social problems, where issues of
class, economics, gender, ethnicity, all come together.

This goes so far that a recent study in wealthy Austria concluded that
600,000 adult Austrians (out of a population of 8.5 million) are
affected by functional illiteracy. Digital literacy is thus a major
issue which has repercussions for many other areas which affect the
basic life chances and citizen rights of people. This poses questions
for self-serving views of some free network activists who think their
networks are free because they use *free software*. When people have
problems with reading and writing, the potentially *liberating*
technology actually just creates further obstacles, as more basic
problems need to be addressed first.

On the other hand, it is exactly the potential of the internet to create
an open knowledge society that makes it still so attractive and which
could also benefit disadvantaged people. In the following chapters, I
will thus try to address those questions. On the one hand, the paradigm
change from industrial to information society has remained incomplete.
It has become stuck halfway, where older layers and mindsets prevail and
prevent the full emancipatory potential of the Net to be realized (see
next chapter The Incomplete Paradigm Shift). On the other hand, I am
certainly not the first and only person to have recognized that there
are complex relationships between free networks, free software and
society. Those problems pose themselves in especially sharp focus when
free networks are created in poor countries and rural areas.

[^05chapter5_1]: Christian Heise, ‘Aktion gegen Störerhaftung: Anonym im WLAN an
    öffentlichen Plätzen mit Freifunk’, 14 June 2012,
    https://freifunkstattangst.de/2012/06/14/aktion-gegen-storerhaftung-anonym-im-wlan-an-offentlichen-platzen-mit-freifunk/.

[^05chapter5_2]: Splash page of Freifunk WLAN Access Point,
    http://anon.freifunk.net/.

[^05chapter5_3]: Monic Meisel, ‘Update zu den Feststellungsklagen’, 23 November
    2014:
    http://freifunkstattangst.de/2014/11/23/update-zu-den-feststellungsklagen/.

[^05chapter5_4]: Prof. Dr. Thomas Hoeren, *Schluss mit der Störerhaftung*,
    Süddeutsche Zeitung, 10 May 2015
    https://www.sueddeutsche.de/digital/forum-wer-haftet-1.2473293.

[^05chapter5_5]: Alfred Krüger, ‘Funkstille in deutschen Städten’, ZDF Heute, 25
    November 2014, archived April 2015,
    https://web.archive.org/web/20150418235850/http://www.heute.de/freie-wlan-netze-funkstille-in-deutschen-staedten-rechtliches-problem-stoererhaftung-36042870.html.

[^05chapter5_6]: Prof. Dr. Thomas Hoeren, *Schluss mit der Störerhaftung*,
    Süddeutsche Zeitung, 10 May 2015,
    https://www.sueddeutsche.de/wirtschaft/forum-wer-haftet-1.2473293.

[^05chapter5_7]: Christian Heise, Gesetzesentwurf zur Neuregelung der
    Störerhaftung: Wie es jetzt weitergeht…, 13 March 2015,
    https://freifunkstattangst.de/2015/03/13/neuregelung-der-stoererhaftung-wie-es-jetzt-weitergeht/.

[^05chapter5_8]: Hamburg.freifunk.net, podcast Freisprech 12, 06 November 2014,
    https://web.archive.org/web/20150317015328/https://hamburg.freifunk.net/2014/11/freisprech-12.html.

[^05chapter5_9]: Armin Medosch, ‘Freie Netze. Geschichte, Politik und Kultur
    offener WLAN-Netze’, Heise Verlag, Hannover 2004,
    https://ftp.heise.de/tp/buch\_11.pdf.
