---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# 6. The Incomplete Paradigm Shift

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.5416666666666665in"
height="4.722222222222222in"}Fig. 24. Carnival Against Capitalism –18
June 1999.

This chapter takes a bird’s-eye view of history, locating the
developments of wireless community networks within a historical
transition from industrial to information society. Following the thesis
that this paradigm shift has become stuck, creating serious obstacles
for realizing the emancipatory potentials of the information society,
the conclusion can only be that those obstacles need to be overcome in
order to realize *Society in Ad-hoc mode* as a positive, really existing
utopia.

The historical context of the problems and issues regarding wireless
community networks is what I call an incomplete paradigm shift. The term
*paradigm* is used here in a specific and well defined sense. While the
*paradigm* has been introduced into the scientific language by Thomas
Kuhn’s seminal book *The Structure of Scientific Revolutions*,[^06chapter6_1] it
has been given new meaning by the Innovation School in economics who,
building on Kuhn’s work, coined the term *techno-economic paradigm*.[^06chapter6_2]
Christopher Freeman and colleagues at the Science Policy Research Unit
(SPRU), a semi-independent research institute connected with the
University of Sussex, developed a theory of innovation in industrial
societies. They claimed that technological progress since the beginning
of the Industrial Revolution did not occur in a linear way, but in
bursts and bouts, followed by periods of only incremental change.
Influenced by the Austrian economist Joseph Schumpeter and by the
Russian econometrist Nikolai Kondratiev, they argued that technological
innovation was linked to the business cycle. It had long been known that
economic activity in capitalist economies followed patterns of expansion
and contraction. There is a short term cycle of three years and a medium
term cycle of ten years, which Marx had already observed and commented
on, but it has been Kondratiev, studying long term price developments of
staple foods such as grains who found out that there were so called
*long cycles* of 50 years, which could be separated in two parts, an
upswing of 25 years, followed by a downswing of roughly equal length.
Those time periods are not mechanical but research since Kondratiev has
confirmed the existence of swings in economic activity of approximately
between 40 and 60 years.[^06chapter6_3]

The period of a downswing, especially in its later stages, is usually
experienced as a severe economic crisis. Schumpeter’s contribution has
been to show that such a crisis can only be resolved by clusters of
innovations. In order to resolve a crisis of a paradigm in decline, a
new paradigm has to come into place. This new paradigm will typically
consist of new *leading technologies* but also new business models and
new ways of working. It is never just the technology alone which allows
a paradigm shift to happen, but without technological change it would
also not be possible. However, in order for this technological change to
happen, mindsets of people also need to change, new laws need to be
made, a wholly new business environment needs to be created. That
explains why it takes such a long time, 25 years, a whole generation,
for a new paradigm to come into place.

The Venezuelan economist Carlota Perez, who also worked with Freeman and
SPRU, has developed a stylized model of paradigm change, which gives
this whole development some further plausibility. According to Perez,
the new paradigm develops inside the womb of the old one.[^06chapter6_4] Perez has
divided the 50 years of the *long-cycle* into four quarters, separated
by an interstice. The first quarter is when innovation gets started,
usually by forward looking people, inventors, entrepreneurs, risk taking
financiers, but also, I would add, artists, activists, and independent
technological innovators. Once they have been able to show the
feasibility of an innovation, others jump on the bandwagon and an
investment frenzy starts. This will lead to an over-investment and a
first crisis – an interim period of uncertainty. Once those insecurities
are overcome, the paradigm reaches maturity stage. In this stage, all
innovations made before are becoming fully relevant on a societal scale.
This is the roll-out phase of the paradigm, when knowledge about new
business processes and new patterns of behavior gets widely shared. Once
this is achieved, however, the benefits of the new technologies, new
business models, new ways of working, start to decrease. Since everybody
now knows how to do it, the competitive advantage is gone, and the
paradigm enters its fourth and last stage, saturation.

The key point, however, that Perez makes, is that during maturation and
especially during saturation phase aspects of a new paradigm are already
developed, albeit not yet widely recognized. While the benefits of the
existing paradigm can still be exploited, something new is already
breeding under the surface. At this stage, however, it is hard to say
what the new paradigm will really be made of.

It needs to be pointed out the theories about techno-economic paradigms
have serious weaknesses. They imply a quite mechanistic way of
historical development and as such, suggest a depoliticized view of
history. History is always defined through human struggles which have
many aspects, be they of a political, cultural or religious kind. Work
under the title *Technopolitics*, initially undertaken by Brian Holmes
and Armin Medosch, meanwhile more widely shared by a Technopolitics
working group in Vienna, has widened the scope and perspective to not
just look at techno-economic but also techno-political paradigms.
History is not only defined by economics and technology, but also by
politics, which implies raising the fundamental question how we want to
live, as individuals and as social groups or classes.

The economic innovation school appears to almost willfully exclude such
a political perspective, implicitly suggesting that capitalism itself
will continue forever, in one way or the other. But as recent years have
shown, the struggle is exactly also about that aspect of the argument,
with new social movements in the European and global South suggesting a
different type of economic model, often based on commons-types of
economic activity where cooperation plays a larger role than
competition.

It is now not so difficult to apply those theoretic concepts to recent
history. According to Freeman, Perez, and other scholars, the fourth
long-cycle had been defined by the industrial mass production of
consumer goods, in particular cars, by communications technologies such
as radio and television (which relied on a centralized *broadcast*
structure) and on cheap energy based on oil and other fossil fuels and
nuclear energy. This paradigm reached maturity during the first decades
after the Second World War, when it allowed for a long boom of economic
expansion, led by the United States. It was successfully copied by
nations who had been defeated in that war but now had become the biggest
American allies, Germany and Japan, as well as other states in Europe.
This industrial paradigm is often referred to as Fordism, after Henry
Ford, who invented the core production technology supporting it, the
assembly line.

However, it is very important to point out that this paradigm also had
an economic and political aspect. Because of the economic, political, or
simply human catastrophes of the first half of the 20th century and
because of the existence of the Soviet Union proposing itself to be an
alternative socio-political model, capital was willing to compromise and
find a way of co-existence with labor. This manifested itself in
concessions to organized labor, such as the right to form trade unions
and the agreement to collective bargaining. These institutional
arrangements guaranteed rising wages and rising living standards in the
USA, Western Europe, and Japan for 25 years. In the 1970s, however, for
a combination of reasons this model entered a crisis, and the new
techno-political paradigm, the *information society* began, at first
under the surface of what was then called *Post-Fordism*.

The 1970s were a period of crisis and transition, when the new paradigm
had been kickstarted by the mass production of microprocessors by Intel
in 1970-71 making computing small and cheap. This was at first only
recognized by an avant-garde of techies, intellectuals, financiers,
people who met, for instance, in the Homebrew Computer Club, or worked
in research labs such as Xerox Park, where the first GUI was created.
Yet by the end of that decade, the first Personal Computers (PCs) were
brought to market, and the electronic and digital world started to
capture popular imagination through video games and films such as Tron.
Now, rather than continuing with such a chronological narrative, I would
like to point out that by the early 1990s, the information society was
established, and with the opening of the internet, an investment frenzy
started, at the time known as the New Economy. It first hit the
headlines of newspapers globally, when the browser company Netscape
received two billion dollars for its initial public offering (IPO) at
the stock market.

When we now take a look at the old paradigm, Fordism, and the new
paradigm, information society or *informationalism*, we can see that in
many aspects it has turned to completely the opposite of what had been
in place before. Had the old paradigm depended on hierarchical chains of
command from top down to the bottom, the new paradigm fostered much
flatter hierarchies and cooperation. This found its most pronounced
expression in the leading sector, ICT (Information and Communications
Technology), where *commons-based peer production* became the new norm.
This term, coined by Yochai Benkler, suggests a new cooperative type of
production, pioneered in free and open source software.[^06chapter6_5] People
decide themselves on which projects they want to work and freely
associate themselves with software projects. These projects are then
often not organized in a completely egalitarian way, sometimes there are
so called benevolent dictatorships. But the core issue is that it is
free cooperation and that the results of that cooperation are entering a
digital commons, a pool of resources which can in principle be used by
all.

I could continue now with a much longer list of transitions from the old
to the new paradigm, but would rather restrict it to a few core
examples. Another important point is the type of media used. Fordism
relied on a centralized model of broadcast media, with electronic media
such as radio and television sending out their messages to people.
*Feedback* was provided mainly through viewer statistics but also focus
groups used in product marketing. The informational paradigm is
characterized by *pull*-type media, where people either communicate with
each other directly, through the internet, or use *on demand* platforms
to watch what they want, when and where they want it. This would seem in
principle to foster a much more egalitarian media culture, a *read and
write* media culture, as Lawrence Lessig, advocate of the Creative
Commons licenses for free content, has called it.[^06chapter6_6]

The problem at which I wanted to get through this rather lengthy
parenthesis is that all those great ideas and innovations have somehow
become stuck halfway. It is true that in principle free cooperation has
become much more important than hierarchical top-down structures.
However, hierarchies have not gone away, and command structures have
become established on another level. It is true that the combination of
cheap computing power, laptops, and the Net has enabled a much more
egalitarian media culture. At the same time, however, new centralized
media powers have arisen which did not even exist 20 years ago,
companies such as Google and Facebook who have acquired a centrality
compared to which Henry Ford's business empire pales.

One aspect of this paradigm change which has not been mentioned yet,
must be added quickly, which is *financialization* and *neoliberalism*.
Finalization describes a process where ever more areas of the economy
were reshaped according to principles stemming from high finance and
finding their most potent expression in computerized, networked stock
markets. This means that even companies who on the surface still
mass-produce consumer goods, now act according to a new set of
principles. While in the old paradigm, the Fordist multinational
corporation had been hierarchically organized, subsuming under one
company all kinds of activities – development, production, marketing,
catering, cleaning – in the financialized economies of now, corporations
have been broken up and shed all those parts which do not promise a
maximum of profit. Production typically happens abroad, in so called
low-wage countries, while things such as cleaning or catering or
transport and logistics are outsourced to companies exposed to breakneck
competition.

This system has arisen in tandem with the neoliberal economy. We can say
that while financialization is the *mode of production* of the
information society, neoliberalism is its political ideology. It
suggests as the best way forward a scaling down of the state and its
functions, while everything should be ruled by market mechanisms. This,
it needs to be said, is an ideology. The reality is different. In
neoliberalism, the markets are not free and the states have an important
function, but this is rarely ever said. Neoliberalism is now the ruling
ideology and as such, it does not have to care about reality. It has won
the argument, at least as far as business circles and politicians are
concerned, and as a consequence, many rights and achievements of the
labor movement have been rolled back. This has led to a much more uneven
economic development, with a rising gap between rich and poor. Even the
OECD, which itself is a kind of neoliberal think tank of the most
developed countries has recently conceded that never before has income
inequality been as pronounced as now.

As a result, the paradigm shift has remained incomplete. As Karl Marx
and Friedrich Engels had already observed in the mid 19th century,
capitalism is technologically innovative. This would create the
condition which would theoretically enable a new type of society. The
informational paradigm has this potential to enable a knowledge society,
a cultural society, where sharing, learning, and the creative
realization of the self become core aims. These beneficial aspects and
potentials of the liberal technological utopia are constantly undermined
by capitalism’s need to maintain current social relations. It has to
catch the surplus amount of freedom in order to maintain the political
status quo. Thus, you have *Störerhaftung*, data retention laws,
surveillance, Big Data, the rule of the financial markets, the command
of capital.

The bigger sweep of history shows that there is a structural analogy
between the distributed or decentralized structure of the Net and the
ideals of the revolutionary sixties. The global revolts of ‘68 were
against the docility induced by one-directional, one-dimensional
societies of mass production, where TV organized the consciousness of
the worker-consumers. The drive for decentralization has come from many
corners, but has its origins in the social movements of the 1960s. The
foundational technologies of the internet were developed in the late
1960s, by staff and students at public universities, who made the
results of their research public, thus creating the foundations of the
digital commons. Inspired administrators such as J.C.R. Licklider were
driven by visions of networked digital public libraries.[^06chapter6_7]

The information society has inherited those ethical values which have
also become embodied in the structure of digital technologies in general
and the internet in particular. From this point of view, the Net as it
exists today is a mesh network, and it is free and neutral, at least on
the level of protocols, as I have written in the first chapter. The
information society as such, however, has only been established in core
nations in the 1980s and 1990s, and not everyone loves its
decentralizing, horizontal, participatory groove. So there are those
continuing tensions and contradictions going on, between those forces
who still defend their privileges and sources of incomes, but also
patterns of thought of the old paradigm, and those who propagate bottom
up social self-organization and a free culture of sharing and
cooperation. Advocates of free culture need to be careful, however, not
to become victims of their own ideology.

As this article on Rhizome[^06chapter6_8] has pointed out, there is a connection
between mesh networking and decentralization in general, but this opens
the danger of a re-centralization. In an article in 2004, I speculated
about similar issues, regarding a *Society in Ad-hoc Mode*. We have to
be careful not to be carried away too much by those technological and
political analogies. A mesh network can also be used by the army. Well,
the first mobile ad-hoc networks were developed by the US army. The
social version of the ad-hoc mode may have liberating potentials, but we
do not need to forget that neoliberalism is the political economy of
informationalism, and that means that ever more areas are exposed to
financialization. The plutocracy of global finance prefers *ad-hoc*
structures such as the G7/8/20 conferences. They like them, rather than
more democratically legitimate structures such as the UNO. Globally
important decisions are made by ad-hoc committees rather than more
democratically legitimized multinational structures. The allocation of
the means of social production – and that is what finance is[^06chapter6_9] – is
regulated by stock markets which are increasingly networked and
automated, rather than by considerations about the well-being of people,
animals, plants and the sustainability of natural resources.
Decentralization can become a dangerous ideology when detached from
actual social content. On a political layer, it is then either a form of
libertarianism or anarchism.

The negative effects of financially driven globalization have been
countered by new global protest movements that emerged as a specific new
political culture of the Net in the 1990s. As the old class politics
were replaced by a newly constituted *working class*, which has become
rechristened as the *multitudes*, new forms of networked protest were
pioneered in the 1990s. With support of the Association for Progressive
Communications[^06chapter6_10] during the Chiapas uprising in 1994, messages from
Subcommandante Marco were smuggled out of the Lacandona jungle via the
Net and triggered a global campaign of solidarity which stopped the
Mexican army from committing genocide against the descendants of the
Maya people.

The increasing financialization during the era of the New Economy peaked
in protests against the financial centers and free trade such as June
18th and the Battle of Seattle in 1999. The multitudes got together on
the streets, organized in a decentralized way, via the Net. It is no
coincidence that June 18th and Seattle were foundational moments for
Indymedia. However, those were early high-points of a new form of
networked protest that has received various names, from the Arab Spring
to the Indignados to Occupy – movements for the right to democratic
self-organization supported by a variety of DIY network technologies.

All major protests against G7/8 meetings after Seattle had independent
media centers, IMCs, which in some cases were attacked by the police.
Ad-hoc networks for mobile devices carried by crowds could make
uncensored communications possible, even when mobile phone networks are
shut off. The ad-hoc mode, the power of self-organization has become
part of a wider epistemological shift in the information society.
Starting in the 1980s, but intensifying in the 90s, there was a flood of
terms such as *emergence*, *complexity*, *self-organization*, which were
spilling over from techno-science into common language. These are all
terms which come from a second order cybernetics, the cybernetics of
cybernetics, and form an epistemological framework for the network
society. In some cases they have become mixed with other terms from the
social sciences and philosophy, such as *spaces of flow* and *lines of
flight*. In some cases this is just old-fashioned philosophical idealism
in a new dress-up. In the worst case, this can become part of an
ideology, where neoliberalism, libertarianism (or anarchism), high-tech
and finance meet to create new ideologies of power and domination, for
which the best example is still Kevin Kelly’s book *Out of
Control*.[^06chapter6_11]

Against this backdrop, I have advocated, already years ago, a political
understanding of the term *self-organization*. One of the few coherent
concepts for self-organization was developed by the philosopher,
psychoanalyst and political activist Cornelius Castoriadis.[^06chapter6_12]

Castoriadis’ ideas center on autonomy (self-determination) as opposed to
heteronomy (outside control). In his view, self-organization is not
simply a better model for organization or management, serving instead as
a principle for ‘the permanent and explicit self-institution of society;
that is to say, a state in which the collectivity knows that its
institutions are its own creation and has become capable of regarding
them as such, of taking them up again and transforming them.’[^06chapter6_13]
Castoriadis went back to the direct democracy of the Greek city state in
order to find out how democracy should reinvent itself today. This
vision could also be achieved by using self-organizing technologies such
as mesh networks. What is dangerous, however, is any belief that
automatically links the technological with the social level of
self-organisation.

The protest movements of the late 1990s and the concepts and ideas of
free software have inspired new ideas regarding the possibility of
self-organization. In the 1990s, this has led to a lively discourse,
first, about the digital commons, then about the notion of the commons
in general. The rise of the information society enabled an avant-garde
of software developers to create the digital commons. As I have
described in much more detail in my article *Shockwaves in the New World
Order of Information and Communication*[^06chapter6_14] the success of the digital
commons has then been transposed into other areas. People such as Michel
Bauwens of the Peer-2-Peer Foundation are propagating the idea of the
commons as a new social model that could be applied in all areas. After
the financial crash of 2008, the commons movement internationally has
taken up steam. Electoral victories by protest movements in Greece and
Spain signal, that a political change has started which could lead not
just to a new techno-economic but also to a different political paradigm
in which the commons and social justice play a greater role.

While I do not insinuate that every member of the free network movements
shares leftist political ideas, I propose to consider such a larger
socio-economic environment. The self-organizing mesh network could
thrive much better in a self-organizing society. Currently we live in an
ongoing era of insecurity. The new paradigm is not yet in sight, its
shape remains to be determined. I think that, without this being a
foregone conclusion, commons of all types, technological, social,
political, could play a much greater role in the next 25 years, while at
the same time we need to be cautious regarding the ideology of the
information society which has made a language of self-organization,
emergence and complexity its own, while actually building new
hierarchies and new forms of domination and repression.

## 6.1 Comment: Brian Holmes: The Long-Awaited Shift is not the Paradigm

### 

Armin, you are a very strict guy when it comes to concepts. From my view
that's fantastic and I think you should go a little further with it.

If we are talking *techno-political paradigms*, the informational shift
happened, and it was complete. From the 90s onward (with significant
precedents in the US a decade before) network technologies under strong
corporate and state control provided the communicational glue for a new
organizational form that was able to reorganize production on
continental and global scales. Of course, financialization represents a
speculative excess over global just-in-time organization. But finance
has also been a key enabling component of the informational production
paradigm. The capacity to raise money on capital markets and use it to
create new industrial plants, extractive operations, and distribution
chains, all in record time, has been the excruciating history of the
last three decades. Finance allowed IT to become productive. The results
have built a new Asia.

What has not yet happened is any perceptible shift in the overall mode
of development. Yet what your text is about (this chapter, and the whole
book) is precisely the emergence, in nuce, of a cooperative mode of
development in the key sector of the neoliberal production paradigm,
which is obviously information technology. That's the amazing thing.
Just as mechanical engineers in the 1910s and 20s were widely seen as
progressive, even revolutionary social agents, so software engineers,
with their open source coding, have been and still are seen as
potentially revolutionary social agents in our time.

What has been missing up to now, in my view, has been the capacity for
the cooperative mode of symbolic code creation to organize forms of
material production that can be concretely useful to everyday life,
beyond the realm of images and signs. The factory mode of production
brought many new use values into being, for all social classes.
Informational production has thus far remained under the control of the
corporations and the state. They dictated its major forms. The paradigm
shift was for them.

Yet probably in the time I have been writing this, solar panels have
gotten cheaper. Certainly their cost has plummeted over the last five
years. We know from the history of techno-politics that a change in
energy source is a major change indeed (cf. the book *Carbon
Democracy*,[^06chapter6_15] a fundamental book for all that interests us). Solar
panels become socially progressive in the context of decentralized smart
grids, and even more so when they are used to power micro-manufacturing
technologies. Under normal circumstances, these are the kinds of
techno-political transformations that capitalist oligopolies would do
everything possible to suppress (call it the *Tesla syndrome*). Today
they are still trying to do that, with the big guns of oil and nuclear
power. But climate change, runaway automation and an exponentially
increasing global population are not normal circumstances. Unprecedented
numbers of people need to survive and thrive in a way that does not
constitute a path toward collective suicide. Solar panels, windmills and
decentralized micro-manufacturing have a real chance over the next long
wave.

Every forty to fifty years, capitalism completes a paradigm shift. Great
news for the capitalists! Or to hell with them, I say. Now, as in the
20s and 30s of the last century, what we can struggle for is something
far more beneficial. A change in the mode of development itself.

[^06chapter6_1]: Thomas S. Kuhn, *The Structure of Scientific Revolutions*.
    Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962.

[^06chapter6_2]: Christopher Freeman and Luc Soete, *The Economics of Industrial
    Innovation*. 3rd revised. Cambridge Mass.: MIT Press, 1997.

[^06chapter6_3]: Joshua S. Goldstein, *Long Cycles: Prosperity and War in the
    Modern Age*. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1988.

[^06chapter6_4]: Carlota Perez, *Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital:
    The Dynamics of Bubbles and Golden Ages*. Cheltenham, UK;
    Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar Publishing, 2002.

[^06chapter6_5]: Yochai Benkler, *The Wealth of Networks : How Social Production
    Transforms Markets and Freedom*. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University
    Press, 2006.

[^06chapter6_6]: Lawrence Lessig, *Free Culture: How Big Media Uses Technology and
    the Law to Lock Down Culture and Control Creativity*. London:
    Penguin Books, 2004.

[^06chapter6_7]: Morris Mitchell Waldrop, *The Dream Machine : J. C. R. Licklider
    and the Revolution that Made Computing Personal*. New York: Penguin
    Books, 2002.

[^06chapter6_8]: Adam Rothstein, ‘Making Internet Local’, Rhizome, 06 November
    2014,
    https://rhizome.org/editorial/2014/nov/6/making-internet-local-mesh-network/.

[^06chapter6_9]: Saskia Sassen, ‘Finance as Capability: Good, Bad, Dangerous’,
    *Arcade,* 2014,
    https://web.archive.org/web/20150620143536/http://arcade.stanford.edu/occasion/finance-capability-good-bad-dangerous.

[^06chapter6_10]: Association for Progressive Communications, https://www.apc.org/.

[^06chapter6_11]: Kevin Kelly, *Out of Control: The New Biology of Machines, Social
    Systems & the Economic World*. New York: Basic Books, 1995.

[^06chapter6_12]: Cornelius Castoriadis took part in the attempted Communist coup
    in Greece in 1944. This experience turned him into an opponent of
    Stalinism and he went to France, where he joined the Trotskyites,
    soon leaving again due to their authoritarian tendencies. He then
    founded the group *Socialisme ou barbarie* and the publication of
    the same name. In his work with this group, he developed his ideas
    of self-organization, using the example of wildcat strikes, among
    others. He was one of the first radical socialists in France at the
    time to publicly criticize Stalinism, as well as publishing
    critiques of Marx’s historical determinism.

[^06chapter6_13]: Cornelius Castoriadis, *The Castoriadis Reader*. Oxford;
    Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell Publishers, 1997, p. 30.

[^06chapter6_14]: Christiane Paul (ed.) *A Companion to Digital Art*, Hoboken, NJ:
    Wiley-Blackwell, 2016, pp. 353-383.

[^06chapter6_15]: Timothy Mitchell, *Carbon Democracy: Political Power in the Age
    of Oil*, Verso, 2011.
