---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# 8. The Mixed Political Economy of Guifi.net

This chapter throws a closer look at the different models used
economically by Freifunk and Guifi. In particular, it investigates in
which ways the fact that Guifi has a mixed political economy contributed
to its growth. This sub-chapter also investigates the terms in which
network freedom is defined and with which other ideas and measures it is
connected.

Guifi and Freifunk have chosen different models. In Germany, it seems
there is a high ethical stance adopted by volunteers who are building
and maintaining networks. The initial *Model 1* as proposed by Consume
(see Chapter 1) was that each node should be built and maintained by its
owner. But this turned out to be slightly utopian. Building proper,
reliable nodes goes still far beyond the capacity of the average user.
So in Germany, the networks are built by volunteers, who donate free
labor to build and maintain networks.

In Spain that happens too, but in addition to voluntary work there is
also the option of having people come to build one’s node in a paid
capacity. Only slowly I start to understand what a complex *being*
Guifi.net is. I am not implying that volunteers in Spain are less
idealistic than their German peers. But I would like to high-light that
Guifi has created a unique mixed economy where capitalist elements can
co-exist with the commons, and vice versa.

Guifi is managing an expanded web of contacts between node builders and
node owners via the Guifi website. This website is, by the way, far more
than simply a website, but more like a central hub that facilitates the
growth of Guifi. A quite elaborate social media system has been built,
which allows users to rate network builders, who are often small IT
companies, consisting of one or two people. In times of a severe
economic crisis in Spain, this enables aficionados of free software and
free networks to earn a bit of money. Maybe this gives Guifi a chance to
maintain its fast growth rates.[^08chapter8_1]

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.386111111111111in"
height="3.0479166666666666in"}Fig. 28. Guifi growth rates from 2004 with
predictions until 2024.

In Germany, it seems, paying people to build networks is anathema to
most. The shared ethical stance – which has been voluntarily adopted and
not been imposed by anyone – demands that people build free networks
through free labor. Both models have their pros and cons. The German
model works as long as enough techies are available to donate their
time. Even the Berlin Backbone is built without paid labor. The funding
from the Berlin Brandenburg Media Agency is only used for hardware and
other materials.

The Spanish model seems to work pretty well too. But it can also have
centrifugal consequences. Some of those service providers will always
want to privatize the network segment they have created. They will try
to take their customers with them and build a service provider company.
However, the Guifi foundation exists as a governance layer to prevent
this.

Both, Guifi and Freifunk have become very strong in advocacy. Neither of
which sees itself as a centralized company or a network provider.
Neither the Guifi Foundation nor the Freifunk Förderverein
(not-for-profit umbrella organization) are running those networks. Their
task is to advocate the building of free networks in two directions: on
one hand, towards the official world of institutions, city, town and
village administrations, and internally, regarding the community of
active and potential network builders. But there is also a difference,
regarding the type of advocacy.

In my view – which I do not claim to be objective and someone can come
and correct me – Guifi advocates the right of access to the internet as
a fundamental freedom and right for all people more strongly than
anybody else, while Freifunk argues slightly differently, advocating the
political implications of a free network, free from government
surveillance and commercial interests, which may distort network
freedom.

Guifi is consciously creating a network commons and uses also the term
commons in its language. Ramon Roca:

The network is managed as a commons. Whatever you have wireless and
cable-bound, whichever protocols, and all the economics – which are a
lot – have to respect that the network is in the commons. It is not in
control of a single person, single company, single point of interest.
That does not mean that there can be no business. A lot of business can
happen around that but based on the service.

He insists that whoever makes a business there by building the network,
planning, and maintaining it, ‘has to respect that the return comes from
his services. It is not coming from claiming ownership of the network
and then asking a higher price to whoever wants to use it. They have to
respect the internet as commons.’ Ramon Roca:

We are not building a private internet, we are part of the internet.
Internet is the result of the networks, so we are simply a part of that.
We have a portion of the internet that works as a commons, and other
portions maybe do not work as a commons. And the only thing we have to
do is to interconnect. So what happens inside the commons is we do not
charge anything for interconnecting.

The mixed economy allows people to build a business model for instance
by providing some kind of support after disasters. They guarantee they
will bring a node back within four hours for a certain fee. But you are
not charging for interconnecting between networks, which is called
peering. Guifi are systematically peering, for free, explains Ramon.

You don’t take economic advantage from each other. Don’t be intrusive in
terms of looking what they are doing, in terms of privacy also, which is
taken care by the licenses, and doing the business but not in
controlling the network, keeping it as a commons.

In order to do so, it would be good to be able to rely on the state as a
benevolent partner. Commons theorists maintain that there should be
alliances between democratic governments to create commons enabling
legislation. Yet regulation can be easily circumvented. Ramon Roca:

But even talking in market terms, everybody knows that the market does
not work if there is no competition. There are many ways of avoiding
competition. So that’s why in every country you have a regulatory agency
to ensure that happens. When there is an incumbent with too much
difference towards the others, there is no free competition and they
will do whatever to protect their position, such as to create
bureaucratic problems. This is a very long story. And it differs between
countries, but often the regulator can be captured by the lobby
interests because they are very powerful.

The interests of the incumbent are often more highly on the mind of
politicians than the interest of the majority of people. Nevertheless,
so far Guifi have been able to fight off any charges, whether they come
from government or business.

In order to keep the balance between commercial business and those
merely participating in the network as a commons, All users of Guifi.net
have to subscribe to *The Compact for a Free, Open & Neutral Network*
(FONN Compact). This contract has carefully looked at other examples
such as the Pico Peering Agreement and has enshrined network freedom in
a small number of principles to which everyone has to subscribe, thus
allowing a network to grow which has different property structures, but
works as a commons regardless, through its commitment to interconnect.
The three principles deserve some closer explanation. I quote:

1\. It is open because it is universally open to the participation of
everybody without any kind of exclusion nor discrimination, and because
it is always described how it and its components work, enabling everyone
to improve it.

2\. It is free because everybody can use it for whatever purpose and
enjoy it as foreseen in the freedoms of the *General principles*
section, independently of their degree of network participation.

3\. it is neutral because the network is independent of the contents, it
does not influence them and they can freely circulate; the users can
access and produce contents independently of their financial capacity or
their social condition. The new contents produced by guifi.net are
orientated to stimulate new ones, or for the network administration
itself, or simply in exercise of the freedom of adding new contents, but
not to replace or to block others.

It is also neutral with regard to the technology. The network can be
built with whatever technology chosen by the participants with the only
limitations resulting from the technology itself.

However, any rule needs enforcement in order to function. Guifi.net has
chosen to look at Elinor Ostrom’s research on how commons can function
and avoid their *tragedy*. From the design principles for a commons,
they have chosen ‘4) Effective monitoring by monitors who are part of or
accountable to the appropriators.’ This is one of the reasons why Guifi
is applying network monitoring methods. It is another thing which
initially perplexed me. In the early days of Consume, metering would
have been seen as a first step towards charging and thus in opposition
to the spirit of network freedom. Ramon Roca disagrees:

We aim for a net neutrality, not only the commons. That’s far from being
a religion. To be neutral we should maintain agnostic in all aspects,
technology, between volunteer activity or professional activity, allow
all uses from free as in beer or commercial services on it..., be safe
from governments... not to say about politics or religions. Important
not to become fundamentalist.

It seems that Guifi does not only have no problems with metering
traffic, but on the contrary, sees it as a prerequisite for building an
effective network commons.

For sustainability of the commons and for managing the network you need
capacity planning and economics involved in investments or operating
expenses (regardless if there is money in between or not). For sure, it
requires metering for managing the network itself, diagnosing where more
capacity is required, etc.

As the mixed political economy of Guifi.net includes governments and
businesses, the metering also serves the aim of checking if people pay
their dues. The condition for businesses and administrations
participating in the commons infrastructure is that they have to
compensate, by paying back something.

The Guifi.net website is the embodiment of this social and technological
construct which is Guifi, a network commons-based on a mixed political
economy. The metering capacity also is a necessity for network planning.
And recently, Guifi cannot be called a wireless community network
anymore, since it has started to deploy more and more fibre. Ramon Roca:
‘We started in 2009; we were realizing that fibre was getting much
cheaper and also much more reliable and capable; but it’s a difficult
journey, with lots of bureaucracy, it’s a complex project, but still a
planning issue.’

Once the new way of working with fibre has been mastered, explains
Ramon, it is quite easy to roll out and can be much more cost-effective
than anything else. With fibre, Guifi can offer one Gigabit per second
symmetric bandwidth. Fibre, Ramon Roca is convinced, is the future.

All those properties together, Guifi’s mixed economy, its strength in
advocacy, the existence of effective mechanisms for conflict resolution
through supervision and its agnosticism, if one can say so, against
anything fundamentalist, make this a very open, very adaptable model
which is, in my view, the secret of Guifi’s success. And Guifi’s mixed
political economy has allowed it to grow at a rate that has made itself
visible in government statistics. Ramon Roca:

In 2004 the region, Osona with 150,000 inhabitants, was ranked 31st in
Catalonia in terms of bandwidth, and now we have ten percent above the
average, because it was the first region to reach the European average.
So now we can provide that we are the only county in Catalonia that
meets the European average, and this year we went above the average. If
you look at the statistics you see we make the difference, it’s the ten
percent. By having alternatives, we can ensure to meet the Digital
Agenda 2020 of the European Union. We are maybe a minority, but we are
still ten percent. And that ten percent will make a difference.

[^08chapter8_1]: Guifi.net: Node statistics,
    https://guifi.net/guifi/menu/stats/nodes.
