---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# 10. Towards the Network Commons (Conclusions)

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.9965277777777777in"
height="2.9944444444444445in"}Fig. 30. Andrews Road, London, May 2005
(from Monoskop[^10chapter10_1]).

Based on a recent trip to Germany, where vibrant new communities have
triggered discussions about what makes the essence of Freifunk, I am
suggesting that the future of wireless community networks lies in the
notion of the Network Commons.

In the course of this book project, I have studied wireless (and wired)
community networks trying to establish the current status of this
movement. Two main research questions have guided my inquiry. First, I
wanted to see if and how wireless community networks connect with larger
questions such as communications freedom; and second, I wanted to find
out if those networks can play a role regarding the democratization of
technology. This second question has two aspects. One regards the
development of technology itself. Wireless community networkers are not
just consumers and users of technology, they are also actively
developing it. My question was, if technologies, developed by a
community, are fundamentally different from technologies developed by
companies and what would make such a qualitative difference. The second
aspect regarding the democratization of technology concerns the role and
function the respective technology plays within a community of users. In
informational capitalism, technology in general and ICT in particular
are key social agents. They are not just neutral tools but connected
with wider social issues. Intricate knowledge of technologies, however,
is restricted to narrow strata of society. The gap between high-priests
of ICT and users, for whom it is a black box, goes across society and
political divides. My assumption is that a lack of knowledge also
furthers other inequalities, economic and political ones. If wireless
community networks thus further knowledge about network technologies,
because the development and application is embedded in a wider
community, then it could be said that they further the *socialization of
technologies*.

When starting this study, I soon became aware that any proper method
applied to the research question would require vast quantities of
empirical research which, due to the limitations of this project, I
would be unable to conduct. It would require, for instance, to gather
comprehensive empirical evidence about who participates in those
networks, what their backgrounds are and which ways of participation
exist. That would mean to engage in field work doing hundreds, not
dozens of interviews. My work has been supported by an EU grant in the
context of the CONFINE project. I was employed by Verein Funkfeuer,
Vienna, on a part-time contract of less than one working day per week
for 14 months. I thus soon decided that I could only do qualitative
research. My main methodology used was participatory observation,
conducted through interviews, research visits, websites, and
mailinglists. I conducted about 20 interviews of different lengths and
intensity.

By and large I think that my research questions have been validated.
Those were interesting questions to ask and they merit further
attention. However, the nature of my research questions does not allow
for a yes or no type answer. Any answer would necessarily be a complex
assessment of a complex matter. My main case studies were Freifunk,
Germany, and Guifi, Spain. In both projects, people are at work who
share a certain set of ethics and their goals coincide with my research
questions. They are building wireless community networks with the aim of
furthering communications freedom, free speech, access to knowledge and
information. This answers the first main research question, whereby
important qualifications are to be made.

The second question regarding the democratization of technologies yields
more mixed results. The intention of the communities involved, in
principle, is to further the democratization of technology, but there
are different views on how this is best achieved. As I have analyzed in
the previous chapter among some members of the developers’ and
activists’ community, mesh network routing protocols are idealized as a
technological fix to all problems of wireless community networks. There
is a widely shared belief that once there exists firmware that is really
easy to install which also uses mesh routing protocols, then nothing can
stop wireless community networks. This type of firmware now more or less
exists. The Quick Mesh Project and also the latest releases of the
Freifunk Firmware meet those requirements to a large degree. However,
this still leaves open the question how easy it is to install and
configure such software. And even if that part becomes solved, there are
other issues regarding installation of antennas, energy supply and so on
and so forth – technical hurdles are bound to continue to exist.
Therefore, the main question regards the nature of participation in
these projects, in particular the relationship between the core of
activists, those people who participate in the network and society at
large. I have been trying to find out, to which degree developers
consider demands arising from the community and to what kind of extent a
knowledge transfer happens between techies and users. As I was lacking
the means to answer those questions through a broad scientific study,
which would require a different project with a significantly higher
level of funding, I can only address those questions as an observer,
participant and interpreter.

## 10.1 The Dispositif of the Self-Organizing Network

On 14 May 2015, I was invited to give a talk at the OpenTech Summit in
Berlin. This was followed, on the 15th and 16th, by the Wireless
Community Weekend at c-base, also in Berlin. At the OpenTech Summit I
presented the summary of my findings. What I said, was about the
following:

In my view, ideas about wireless community networks in Europe were first
raised by initiatives such as Consume and Free2air.org in London, around
the year 2000. While there existed other initiatives as well, nobody
else made such a concerted effort, not just technologically but also
ideologically, intellectually, in furthering those ideas. As I have
described it in the first chapter, Consume produced a dispositif of the
network commons, an idea, but also material support structures and a set
of methods which enabled the building of a network commons. I am aware
that I am slightly misappropriating this term by Michel Foucault.
Foucault’s notion of the dispositif is largely concerned with how power
is distributed in society. The dispositif of the network commons is
concerned with the distribution of a type of network that is free from
hierarchical power relations as far as possible. Consume’s *Model 1* was
the idea of a network where each node is owned and maintained by its
users. There is no centralized entity, neither technologically speaking
(no supernodes which can become control points), nor organizationally.
There should not be a company or other type of organization which runs
the network. The network would be created through a process of social
self-organization. An important aspect of self-organization would be
provided by organizing workshops in regular intervals and having local
meeting points which allow people to come together and share ideas,
knowledge, skills, technologies.

The dispositif of the network commons traveled over the English channel
and found support in Germany. In Berlin, a group of people came together
and started, first, a regular meeting at c-base, called Wavelöten, and
soon Freifunk (free radio), an initiative to build network commons,
first in Berlin, later all over Germany.

Independently of Freifunk a similar initiative had started in Austria,
called Funkfeuer (radio beacon). Funkfeuer had the advantage of being
able to start on the basis of an existing installation. In the late
1990s, early 2000s, the provider Sil had been one among the most
innovative internet companies in Europe and worldwide. As I have written
in my article *Kreative Milieus* (2012[^10chapter10_2]), Sil was the result of a
creative milieu, of the coming together of artists, hackers, designers,
and an entrepreneurial spirit. The company was among the first in Europe
to offer fixed leased line broadband internet via ADSL for competitive
prices through a partnership with two other small providers called
Vienna Backbone Service (VBS). In the late 1990s VBS/Sil was looking
into ways of consolidating its success by moving into the wireless
medium. The artist-engineer Franz Xaver, while working for Sil, created
Funkfeuer, a wireless network on the rooftops of Vienna, built to
professional standards. But that proved too costly for Sil, which was,
after all, a commercial company. Sil abandoned the effort and for a
while the antenna and router installations lay silent. Then a new
initiative formed around the young computer technician Aaron Kaplan to
revitalize Funkfeuer. He had actually read an early draft of my first,
German, book on Freie Netze which gave him the idea. Initially,
Funkfeuer also operated a free WLAN hotspot in Vienna’s Museum Quarter,
in cooperation with the NGO Quintessenz. The hotspot served the purpose
of showing that an open public WLAN access point could be operated
without submitting to regulations regarding mandatory data retention. To
cut a long story short, Freifunk and Funkfeuer became resounding
successes.

Both networks initially grew rapidly. Freifunk in Berlin was propelled
by the lack of availability of affordable broadband in certain areas. In
former East Berlin, after German reunification, German Telekom installed
a fibre optic network called OPAL. The same story was replicated in
towns and regions across the former GDR, in cities such as Leipzig.
Because of the OPAL fibre network, those areas could not receive cheap
ADSL broadband access. Freifunk has had a strong argument. By joining
Freifunk, people could gain fast internet access almost free of cost. In
Leipzig, Freifunk soon had 900 nodes, in Berlin at one point more than
1000. At the same time the German and Austrian free network communities
were fervent developers of mesh network routing protocols. At first,
OLSR was adopted, then B.A.T.M.A.N. was developed out of the heart of
the community. Freifunk and Funkfeuer also developed organizational
ideas of their own which went beyond what Consume had dreamed up. It can
thus be generalized that they did not just adopt the dispositif of the
network commons, but contributed to it significantly. One key difference
was that Consume was very British in a certain sense, that it had a
strong libertarian or anarchist ideology at heart, which at some point
becomes impractical when it comes to organizational issues. Those
ultra-liberal instincts amount almost to a fear of doing anything that
may be seen as prescriptive or normative. The ideology of Consume was
that the network had to grow by itself. But the reality was that the
moment key protagonists of Consume withdrew from publicly advocating it,
it stopped developing at all and then fell apart. Since around 2006-7
Consume stopped being a publicly recognizable entity. Freifunk and
Funkfeuer, on the other hand, soon founded a *Verein* each. A Verein is
a registered non-commercial association which allows doing things
collectively without running a business. Freifunk Germany from the very
start was adamant that *Förderverein Freie Netze* was no umbrella
organization under which all other Freifunk initiatives had to be
subsumed. And most importantly, the *Verein* was not to be mixed up with
the function of a provider. Its role was merely to give the movement a
kind of backing by doing fund raising and giving it a voice also
publicly, when talking to politicians and regulators.

As I have already written in previous chapters, while Freifunk was
growing rapidly throughout the 2000s, German law – or rather *legal
practices* always had maintained a threat to the movement through so
called *Störerhaftung*. This means that if a private person offers an
open WLAN hotspot this person can be made responsible for infringements
committed by users. There had been precedents in German law where people
were made responsible for illegal filesharing over their open WLAN.
This, however, was not even the main source of the problem for Freifunk.
The real trouble is that there are law firms in Germany which make it
their business model to send threatening letters to everyone suspected
to have broken the law. They send out mass letters to people supposedly
running open WLAN routers threatening to sue them unless they settle out
of court by paying a certain sum. It is very rare that such a case
actually comes before a court because this is not really the intention
of those law firms. Their intention is to scare people so that they will
give in and pay them money.

Such practices discomforted Freifunk activists. Therefore, the
Förderverein Freie Netze created a workaround, the Freifunk Freedom
Fighter Box, a WLAN router configured in such a way that it creates a
VPN (a secured virtual private network) which routes internet traffic
via a provider in Sweden. If no data packet hits German ground, German
legislation does not apply. This created a lot of publicity but also
adversity. Elements of the German press accused Freifunk of a lack of
patriotism by going through a Swedish provider. Thus, Freifunk
diversified the method. It also found German providers who allowed
tunneling to them. When access is provided by a bona fide provider,
*Störerhaftung* does not apply because providers, like telecoms, are not
liable for violations of laws by their users.

Providers, however, have other obligations. It has been only relatively
recently, in April 2014, that the EU data retention directive has been
brought down by a decision of the European Court of Justice. Member
states are keen on reinstating a similar law which forces providers to
store communications data for later usage. This would be in total
opposition to the values held by the free networks community, I would
assume. Anyway, the issue I want to get at is that there is no ideal
solution. Following the example of Förderverein Freie Netze, many local
Freifunk initiatives also formed a registered association and attained
the status of an internet service provider which made them exempt from
liability for the actions of their users.

## 10.2 The New Ideological Divide

In my presentation at the OpenTech Summit, I argued that the belief in
mesh networking technology as the *golden bullet*, the magical solution
to all problems, was mistaken. While techies believed that technology
would provide the fix for all problems, the real problems were of a
social and political kind and not easily solvable through technology
alone. I presented this with a punchline. I said that while hackers in
the past had told newbies always to RTFM, which stands for *Read the
Fucking Manual*, I am now telling hackers my own version of RTFM, which
in my case stands for *Read The Fucking Marx* (whereby Marx does not
just literally mean Marx but all Marx inspired social theory and
critique). I honestly expected to get booed when I would say that, but
actually I was cheered on. Later I was to find out that my speech had
touch on open points of lively ideological discussions going on inside
the Freifunk community.

As I found out through discussions around the barbecue at the Wireless
Community Weekend (WCW) on the following day, Freifunk had gone through
a specific curve in its development. After growing rapidly almost
throughout the 2000s, German IT infrastructure providers had upgraded
their infrastructure, which meant removing the OPAL obstacle to
broadband via ADSL. As the obstacle for getting broadband was removed,
the incentive for joining Freifunk was lessened. At around 2009 it
started getting quiet around Freifunk. But then the Snowden affair
kickstarted a new wave of free wireless networking. As people realized,
through the revelations of whistleblower Edward Snowden, how widespread
snooping on their communications habits was, both by the state but also
by private companies, they also realized that the *free* in Freifunk had
other connotations as well rather than just cheap internet. A range of
new initiatives started, especially in former West Germany, where
Freifunk had not been that strong during its early years.

For instance, it was only in 2011 that Freifunk Rheinland[^10chapter10_3] was
founded (Freifunk in the Rhine valley). In 2013, it celebrated its 100th
node, in May 2015, it had more than 1000 nodes. Freifunk Rheinland
understands itself as a loose connection of local networks in currently
42 towns. It has servers at major internet exchanges and is also member
of RIPE (regional internet registry for Europe). In the vicinity of it,
there is also Freifunk NRW (North Rhine Westphalia). Actually, it calls
itself *Verbund freier Netzwerke*[^10chapter10_4] which insinuates that it is an
actual umbrella organization which represents all the smaller networks
belonging to it. This is a hierarchical organization which is not in the
spirit of the original idea.[^10chapter10_5]

However, to take things further, having a web-based forum is something
that is anathema to most Freifunk people of an older generation. Some
new initiatives are presenting themselves to the public in a way which
is not in the decentralized spirit of the original model at all. There
are initiatives which present themselves and act as a kind of
alternative internet service provider. This goes deep into the way how
technology is used. There is a new version of the Freifunk Firmware,
called Gluon, which allows remote software updates. Freifunk Munich
recently proudly informed its members about the successful remote
upgrade of the firmware of 300 routers. Remote software upgrades of this
kind fly in the face of the network commons dispositif. Some other
people have even opened a Freifunk shop[^10chapter10_6] where you can buy hardware
which has the Freifunk firmware pre-installed. Freifunk Firmware, by the
way, now exists in two main versions and more than 40 flavors.

The bottom line is that there is a new generation of activists who do
not share the same set of values at all. It seems that they see the
building of a Freifunk type of network as some sort of sport, proudly
announcing when they break another quantitative landmark (1000+ nodes!).
There is quite a variety of those new initiatives and one should avoid
generalizing too much. Some initiatives are actually very close to the
ideas of the original dispositif of the network commons. Others have
barely hidden commercial aspirations. And others again, whilst operating
under a non-commercial *Verein* (registered association) and subscribing
to the basic set of values, have condescending views of the people who
participate in their networks, whom they see as end-users. Some of those
differences may be based on a generation gap. Whilst it is always
dangerous to classify a whole generation under this or that label, just
because they have been born at around the same time, what seems obvious
is that younger people have grown up within the neoliberal information
society. They are net-savvy and naturally use the techniques of Net 2.0,
but they have also been shaped by consumer society and a certain
competitive attitude prevalent in the neoliberal age. This sort of
edginess makes itself felt in forum postings which are outright hostile
to Förderverein Freie Netze.

The association created in Berlin in 2003, which has done so much for
the network commons, gets denounced as an obstacle to growth. Its set of
values – which can be summed up in the slogan Decentralize! – is even
considered *dogmatic* or *fundamentalist*. They call Freifunk Berlin the
*legacy* organization, as if this was an obsolete version of Freifunk,
insinuating that the new model is better adapted to the contemporary
landscape and has more efficient ways of growing networks.

Jürgen Neumann and Monic Meisel of Förderverein Freie Netze try to
counter those tendencies in a measured way. In those cases where the
Freifunk logo and name are clearly abused for commercial ventures, they
are working with lawyers to fight against that. The ideological
differences they try to work through by raising a discussion about the
original values.

## 10.3 Memorandum of Understanding

At the Wireless Community Weekend (WCW) 2015 a *Memorandum of
Understanding*[^10chapter10_7] was released which summarized the original ideas of
Freifunk and called for an open debate. At the same time a national
*Advisory Council* was formed which should serve as supervising instance
in disputes about domain names and related issues. If that will help is
not clear. In the week after WCW the general mood seems positive, as the
new initiatives were received positively by the community. The
Memorandum of Understanding and the Advisory Council are part of a
larger change in strategy. Förderverein Freie Netze does not necessarily
advocate the foundation of a Verein (registered association) for each
local initiative. They now say any group of people can make a Freifunk
initiative, recognizing that the structure of those *Vereine*, so well
known in Germany, tends to attract the wrong kind of people who are
experts in that type of community organizing. A negative example is
provided, unfortunately, by Funkfeuer Vienna. This has become a tightly
run organization, very inward looking and barely communicating with the
outside world. It seems significant also that Funkfeuer is stagnating,
the number of nodes has roughly been the same for years, and the website
has hardly any new content. While Freifunk and Guifi.net communicate
with the world through thousands of channels, Funkfeuer oozes the spirit
of self-contained nirvana of nerd. The prevalent attitude is similar to
those of HAM radio amateurs, a tightly knit group of males who like to
experiment with latest technology. Benefits to society may arise in
times of natural disasters, but apart from that it is not evident if or
in which ways this once so vibrant initiative participates in wider
social issues.

Freifunk, on the other hand, as Elektra remarked with a laugh, has
arrived in the mainstream of German society, with all pros and cons. In
the region of Franconia, in the south, Freifunk has been adopted by the
local branch of the CSU, the Christian Conservative party. Local and
regional newspapers are full of articles about Freifunk, not always
positive. It seems that Germany is a more politicized society, where
issues such as surveillance, privacy, network freedom, and communication
freedom are of concern for a growing number of people.

All those things were debated hotly at the WCW. The spectrum of opinions
stretches from those who think that routers with pre-installed firmware,
serviced and maintained from remote by experts, are the way forward.
Others think that this is a consumerist ideology which has nothing in
common with the original idea. They insist that the transfer of
knowledge between core activists and users is an important facet, that
there should be no Freifunk shops, no pre-installed software. If that
implies that growth is much more slow or even stalls, than that is the
price. They are convinced that upholding the original idea is much more
important than quantitative success, expressed in numbers of routers
flashed. But is there such a thing as the original idea? Has not the
idea of what a free network is already changed? Has not the very success
of Freifunk and Guifi shown that the idea of Consume was a tick too
Utopian, that it needed a less fundamentalist, slightly less
decentralized approach? On the other hand, a centralized structure such
as Funkfeuer, based on a *Verein* (registered association) and a closed
community of males with an affinity for technology, can create a network
which functions as a commons for its participants but appears as a
closed network to the outside world. While being a closed community,
Funkfeuer can still make important contributions to the development of
experimental network technology.

[^10chapter10_1]: https://monoskop.org/images/c/c3/Armin\_Medosch\_1962-2017.pdf.

[^10chapter10_2]: Armin Medosch, ‘Kreative Milieus’. In *Vergessene Zukunft:
    Radikale Netzkulturen in Europa*, 1. Aufl., pp. 19–26. Bielefeld:
    Transcript, 2012.

[^10chapter10_3]: Freifunk Rheinland, https://www.freifunk-rheinland.net/.

[^10chapter10_4]: Verbund freier Netzwerke Nordrhein-Westfalen (VFN-NRW), Über den
    Verein, achived October 2015,
    https://web.archive.org/web/20151011083542/https://vfn-nrw.de/uber-den-verein/.

[^10chapter10_5]: This is claimed in this Forum post which created 254 responses so
    far: Freifunk Forum, FreifunkNRW weiterhin irreführend, March/April
    2015,
    https://forum.freifunk.net/t/freifunknrw-weiterhin-irrefuhrend/3448.

[^10chapter10_6]: Freifunk Shop, Herzlich Willkommen im Freifunk-Shop!, archived
    November 2015,
    https://web.archive.org/web/20151114002919/http://freifunk-shop.net/.

[^10chapter10_7]: ‘Memorandum of Understanding’, *Freifunk Blog,* 15 May 2015,
    https://blog.freifunk.net/2015/05/15/memorandum-understanding/.
