---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# 12. Network Commons Case Studies and Correspondence

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="5.152083333333334in"
height="3.863888888888889in"}Fig. 31. Mauricio Roman, installing a mesh
router. Cerro Mariposa (Butterfly Hill), Valparaiso.

This chapter contains contributions by a range of authors on separate
topics and case studies.

## 12.1 Ignacio Nieto: Free Mesh Networks. Two Cases from Chile

![](media/image2.jpeg){width="5.239583333333333in"
height="2.2597222222222224in"}Fig. 32. Ignacio Nieto, installing a mesh
router. Cerro Mariposa (Butterfly Hill), Valparaiso.

This article starts with a short introduction to free networks, followed
by a summary about free networks in Latin America. The article then
tells in more detail the story of two attempts at making free networks
in Chile, in both cases linking the idea of free networks with specific
artistic and socially engaged goals, reports Ignacio Nieto, who has been
involved in both projects.

Free networks have made possible new alternatives that allow to think
about autonomy from the commercial ISP system and be able to share
information between peers and on an equal basis. Free servers have
allowed creating services on the Net which are not determined by
commercial interest and which are not governed by the desire to control
information. However, they have also led to the overcrowding of the
spectrum for IEEE 802.11 technology.

In 2001, *NYCwireless* has been created as a nonprofit organization that
promoted and enabled the growth of free, wireless, public access to the
internet in the city of New York and surroundings. Several free networks
have emerged with similar objectives, both in Latin America and in the
world. Standing out is Guifi.net, for its rapid growth, a project which
began to take shape in 2004 near Barcelona. On November 17, 2006, the
National Youth Council of Catalonia gave to guifi.net the award for most
innovative partnership project, as a pioneering project which enabled
new forms of participation, beyond offering free internet. Guifi.net
provides resources to the community and interconnects the rural world,
while bringing closer young people to new information and communication
technologies. In the year 2008, a private foundation for a Commons
Telecommunications Network, Open, Free, and Neutral, Guifi.net, was
legally established as a platform for cooperative R & D and as a forum
for institutions, organizations, and companies interested in
participating in a global project for the development of infrastructure
and network services.

The development and growth of these communities resulted in the
development of free software, focused on replacing the routers’ factory
firmware to allow greater control and the ability to incorporate new
features. In early 2004, based on a Linux kernel, the first release of
OpenWRT appeared. Currently it has a repository system that installs
around two thousand applications, and there are versions for a lot of
different architectures, compatible with various routers and inexpensive
computers. This facilitated the emergence of several derivative projects
which have contributed to the development of the state of the art.

One case was Netsukuku, a firmware developed by the Italian hacklab
Freaknet, makers in 1998 of the first hack meeting. Its proposal arises
with the idea of creating a pure network that would use chaos theory in
the sense that it is created and maintained autonomously, adapting to
mutations in the network connections. Binding of management algorithms
of a pure network with fractal algorithms and mathematical theories of
chaos is one of the features that give Netsukuku the power to create a
diffused and distributed, non-centralized, anonymous, anarchic,
uncontrollable, and finally, autonomous network. The goal is that
anyone, anywhere, anytime can immediately connect to the network without
having to go through bureaucratic controls or having to sign contracts.
The IP address which identifies a computer will be chosen randomly and
unambiguously (the eventual IP *collisions* will be resolved by a hash
table), so the IP number will not be associable to a precise physical
location (its server), and those routes, formed by a huge number of
nodes tend to have a high complexity and density as they do not allow
the tracing of a particular node, due to the complexity and randomness
allocator IP. In May 2010, Andrea Lo Pumo, as part of the Netsukuku
project, published his dissertation *Scalable Mesh Networks and the
Address Space Balancing problem*.[^12chapter12_1]

There are several algorithms for mesh routing, among them OLSR,
B.A.T.M.A.N., and PA-SHWMP. Currently open source developers struggle to
find the best routing protocol. That is why they meet once a year for a
Wireless Battle Mesh.[^12chapter12_2]

In Latin America, the creation of collective-oriented implementations of
free networks began to settle early, in far more precarious
circumstances than in the so-called first world countries. One of the
first known cases is Buenos Aires Libre, also known as *BAL*.
Originally, the group was called WirelessZonaSur and was then known as
FreeBaires. Although there is little clarity about its foundation, it
was apparently circa 2001 that it started developing as *Buenos Aires
Libre* (BAL), with the objective of implementing a data network, free
and community-based, for the City of Buenos Aires and its surroundings,
connected with services like Wikipedia in Spanish, including
community-based services. Jointly with the installation of nodes, BAL
conducts outreach and training, where the building of antennas with
household items is taught. They have participated in events like
*Wikimania* (2009) and the free culture festival *Fabrica de Fallas*
(Failures Factory), organized by Radio La Tribu since 2008, and have
contributed to the emergence of other free networks such as FerNet,
Rosario, MontevideoLibre or LugroMes, who have excelled in developing
the firmware Nightwing and have recently cooperated in developing a
version that can meet the specific needs of BogotaMesh, a free network
that has a precursor in Andres Burbano, the first free network project
in Bogota in 2007.

In 2010, BAL organized the first Jornadas Regionales de Redes Libres
(JRRL, Regional Conference of Free Networks) in which free networks from
Argentina, Uruguay, Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Paraguay meet. During
the second JRRL in Tacuarembo, Uruguay, work on the preparation of the
manifesto of Latin American free networks began, which was finished and
presented publicly in the third JRRL, conducted within the framework of
the 12th International Free Software Forum (FISL) in Porto Alegre,
Brazil. This event also included the participation of Elektra, developer
of B.A.T.M.A.N. (Better Approach To Mobile Ad-hoc Networking), among
with Rodrigo Troian from RedeMesh (Brazil) and Hollman Enciso from
Bogotá-Mesh. Together, they traveled to Santiago, Chile, to deploy an
open network using the mesh routing protocol B.A.T.M.A.N.-adv, in a
community called La Victoria (The Victory), the first occupied area in
Latin America. We established our base station at Channel 3, a pirate
television UHF frequency station that began their transmissions during
the late nineties. The station’s editorial line is left-leaning,
connecting with the 70’s in Latin America. This particularity mixed with
the idea of centralized signal transmission was why we chose it. We
proposed a project for FONDART, the National Funds for the Arts of
Chile, and we won it. We installed five nodes in different houses in the
La Victoria area.

The project that was funded, focused on the transmission of digital
video in an internet portal. Any person in reach of the radio signal of
these free network nodes could access the web portal and see and hear
the videos transmitted from Channel 3. Elektra, from B.A.T.M.A.N.
protocol, funded by FONDART, was invited to work technically to install
the network.

A mesh network was working in the winter of 2010 in La Victoria. We
could *see* all nodes and also the web portal, but we could not transmit
video from Channel 3. Elektra left it in that state, and afterwards the
person in charge conducted bad management, taking the money of the
project for his own purpose. So the group that was working on the mesh
network broke up and the mesh network was abandoned.

A second free network project was run when the curator of Encuentro de
Cultura Digital (digital culture gathering) met Elektra in Berlin. The
curator spoke with me and we decided to invite Elektra again, funded by
the New Media Department of the a Chilean Ministry of Culture, Arts and
Heritage.

We established our base in Espacio G,[^12chapter12_3] an alternative gallery hacker
space in the city of Valparaiso. One of the curatorial ideas was to work
with the people who had lost everything to the fires during the summer
of 2014 in Valparaiso. So a prototype was developed and installed in two
community centers and two houses in ButterFly Hill. Technically
speaking, the network was based on an infrastructure which combines
antennas, software, and a social network that can be freely used. In the
sense of the context, the installation of this network up on a hill
broke typical communication flows. Topologically, people who live in the
hills, usually have to go down to communicate in a verbal or non verbal
way. All the services of the city (school, stores, baths etc.) are in
the plain, far away from the places we installed the network. This
produced a new form of communication that impacted directly on the way
the city was organized, generating new forms of activity that have
nothing to do with other urbanized public or private spaces.

Technically speaking, these technologies are difficult to install,
manage, support, and train. Chile is not a rich country, and especially
the community members who work in these projects, have no free time to
work on this network.

In the first case, technically speaking it was impossible to transmit
digital video to the community. The mesh network was too weak, besides
we got economic problems that broke the group and we never prepared a
final document to give back to the FONDART evaluators.

In the second case, Mariposa Hills are far away from Espacio G and we
did not have any financial support to go on with the project. Also,
people at Valparaiso were not motivated enough to go on with the
project. The distance is too great and the community of hackers in
Valparaiso is a very close-knit community. As for myself, I live in
Santiago, so it was quite expensive for me go there and work for free.

## 12.2 Letter to Fidel and Raul Castro

![](media/image3.jpeg){width="4.243055555555555in"
height="3.1819444444444445in"}Fig. 33 Cuba Libre.

Dear Fidel and Raul,

Recently, I had the opportunity to visit Cuba as a tourist. I would like
to use this opportunity to send you a letter. I really do not want to be
seen lecturing two great leaders such as you, by offering my unasked
advice, but my suggestions are simple and constructive as you will see,
so please take the time to read this letter.

First of all, my heartfelt congratulations on the release of the three
heroes from the Cuban Five. This is indeed a victory and a recognition
of Cuba’s independence and right to self-determination.

I happened to be in Cuba when that announcement was made. That day, we
traveled from a tourist hotel in Varadero to Playa Larga/Caleton, at the
Bay of Pigs, also known as Playa Gíron. In Varadero, staff were
gathering in front of a large flatscreen television showing Telesur TV –
the Cuban CNN. We could understand what was going on by reading the
scrolling subtitles.

This was truly a historic date. We were traveling as tourists, as I
said, and I have not done any substantial reading on Cuba, I will openly
admit. Neither as a journalist nor cultural theorist I am a Cuba
specialist. And I was not going to comment on those big historical dates
either. I just wanted to provide some way of expressing my gratitude of
having spent three weeks in a wonderful country with wonderful people.
We enjoyed our holiday tremendously and surely will be coming back.

![](media/image4.jpeg){width="4.743055555555555in"
height="3.5569444444444445in"}Fig. 34. High-rise with socialist
abdominal belt in Havana.

But between all the bliss of Sun, Sea, Salsa (the music and the food) we
found one thing lacking. This was the internet, particular in its
wireless form, through WLAN. The internet, if it was offered, was always
locked into a room, which can be unpleasant in a hot country. It was
also expensive and slow, if it worked at all. Being expensive is maybe
the least important point, but since this is more a matter of principle,
allow me to make a proposition.

The internet is not to be treated just as any other commodity. It is,
like with Marxism itself, something that does not become less by getting
used. Through its usage, it becomes more valuable, because it allows
people to exchange information directly and engage in unfiltered,
two-directional people-to-people communication. It also gives people an
opportunity to access wide areas of knowledge and to learn about
contemporary affairs as well as study history.

The internet gives those with less power a chance in many different
ways. They can communicate directly from remote places with people all
over the world and get their message through, just like the Zapatistas
did in Chiapas in the 1990s, sending messages directly from the
Lacandonian jungle to the world.

![](media/image5.jpeg){width="4.925in" height="3.692361111111111in"}Fig.
35. Street scene in Havana.

The internet is not a commodity like any other commodity. I would like
to thus add a recommendation. In order to further the internet in Cuba
and give Cuban people a fair chance in the globalized world, the
techniques of free wireless (and wired) community networks could be
applied. Those projects are taking the principles of *agricultura
urbana* to new technologies.

Worldwide, currently there exist several movements for the creation of
free networks – wireless community networks as a self-provided internet.
One such group is Guifi.net[^12chapter12_4] who originate from Catalonia, Spain, and
are now operating all over Spain and beyond. Here, people use ways of
pooling their skills and some small funds for materials, to build a
wireless internet in the sky. With such methods, large scale networks
can be constructed, shown by many examples such as Guifi, Freifunk in
Germany, Ninux in Rome and Italy, Athens Wireless. There are now
examples also much further south, such as Valparaiso Mesh.

These networks operate like cooperatives, pooling their resources to
have cheap wireless broadband. In some cases it has been shown to be
more interesting to lay fibre optical cable, also as part of a community
network which is shared as a *commons*. This idea of the pooling of
resources in the network commons has emerged directly from the
capitalist core. It is one of those *events* in history which confirm
the idea of Marx and Engels, that the capitalistic revolution of the
means of production creates the condition for the social revolution. The
network commons creates conditions for capitalism to surpass itself. So
in its dialectical movement, capitalism creates the conditions that
allow the network commons to emerge, but then it also fights it.

On one hand, the network commons in particular, and the wider free and
open source software movement in general, represents the surplus of the
utopian values of liberal capitalism, on the other hand it points at a
stage surpassing it. This possibility of surpassing is fought by the
conservative forces within capitalist societies. So they try to hinder
it, by using all kinds of laws and measures, like copyright and
surveillance, from fully developing, and thereby stifle and undermine
the potential which the free exchange between people may have.

But I am convinced that the community-based method of network deployment
is the best for Cuba, in particular with regard to cost, resilience and
people’s participation. Those community networks, because they are built
and maintained by their users, tend to be quite resilient during natural
disasters. They are also resilient in case capitalist infrastructure
breaks down, due to the crisis-prone mode of development of capitalism.
They allow people to organize their own telecommunications and therefore
make digital networks more transparent to their users.

If there is any idea that Cuba might adopt such a community-based model,
I am sure, the activists from cooperative wireless networks everywhere
will be happy to give advice. I personally can not offer any practical
support, as I am a writer who chronicles those developments. By letting
you know these things I am not following any commercial interest. If
necessary, I can help to get in contact with the right people from the
free wireless movement.

Last not least, I would like to express my personal admiration for your
achievements and express my heartfelt support for the future development
of *project Cuba*

yours sincerely,

Armin Medosch, February 2015.

[^12chapter12_1]: Andrea Lo Pumo, *Scalable Mesh Networks and The Address Space
    Balancing Problem*, dissertation submitted to the University of
    Cambridge, 31 May 2010,
    https://archive.org/details/scalable\_mesh\_networks\_and\_the\_address\_space\_balancing\_problem-andrea\_lo\_pumo.

[^12chapter12_2]: Wireless Battle Mesh, https://www.battlemesh.org/.

[^12chapter12_3]: Espacio G, archived May 2015,
    https://web.archive.org/web/20150505210255/http://www.espacio-g.cl/.

[^12chapter12_4]: Guifi.net, https://guifi.net/.
